# HISTORY OF MARGARET EVANS

### (1836 - 1893)

\[Portait\]

Margaret Evans was born October 10, 1836, at Conwil Elvet, Carmarthenshire,
Wales. She was the daughter of Ebenezer Evans and Amy Williams.  Her brothers
and sisters were: Mary, Rachel, Ann, Amy, William, John, Evan, David, Stephen,
and Sophia. They were farmers and the women worked in the fields the same as
the men.

Margaret was an attractive girl with fair skin, auburn hair and large brown
eyes. She married William Morse at Kidwelly, Carmarthenshire, Wales.  Mary
Jane, their oldest daughter, was born at Merthyr Tydfil on January 26, 1860 and
Ann was born August 9, 1862 at Mountain Ash, Glamorganshire, which is just a
few miles from Merthyr.

Her family disowned her because her husband was a Mormon and entertained Mormon
missionaries. Margaret was known as their lost child.

She immigrated to America on June 4, 1863 on the ship “Amazon”, which sailed to
New York from the port of London. It was a long, tiresome crossing of over
seven weeks in the sailing vessel. She crossed the plains with the Thomas E.
Ricks Company walking most of the way and carrying her second daughter, Ann, in
her arms. While crossing the plains, the wagons were too heavy for the oxen to
pull so the teamster made Margaret leave part of her precious possessions along
the roadside, including her flat iron and cooking utensils, among several other
treasures. She cried because she had to part with her treasures. She suffered
many hardships along the way and considered the plains long and dreary.

They arrived in Salt Lake City at the Tithing Yard on October 4th. They stayed
there a few days and were advised by the Church leaders to travel on to Logan,
where her husband built a dugout for them. It wasn’t very comfortable, but more
livable than a wagon box. In this dugout, Emma Morse Price was born on June 17,
1865.  Margaret found a large lizard in her bed the day Emma was born. Their
dugout was located in the present Third Ward of Logan.

\[Photo of William Morse\]

Sometime later they built a one-room cabin with logs that her husband cut from
a nearby canyon. In this log home her first and only son, William Evans Morse,
was born on October 31, 1868.

In the year of 1869 her husband traveled to Samaria, Idaho. There he built a
log house with a dirt floor and factory windows. Then he returned to Logan for
his family. He traveled by way of wagon and ox team. Other families they knew
also went to Samaria to make their homes. Here their family increased to eight.

Margaret was a hard worker and was always willing and ready to help in time of
sickness or death. She was very kind and generous and was like a mother to
everyone who came to her for any assistance. She knit lots of woolen stockings
for her children using one thread of cotton to make the heels and toes
stronger. She used lime to whitewash her walls and ceiling and used a piece of
sheepskin for a brush. For chairs they used benches made of slabs cut in a
nearly hand-made sawmill. These she scoured the wood with sand until smooth.
She gathered the sand by the spring where they got their drinking water. All of
their furniture was homemade. The bedsprings were made of rope and the
mattresses were made of ticking filled with straw. She used maple wood ashes in
water to extract the lye for washing and for making soap. She also used to card
wool and send it away to be made into underclothes.

\[Photo\]

Family of William Morse and Margaret Evans  
Standing Left: Ann Morse Camp, Sarah Morse Williams, William Evans Morse, Emma
Morse Price, Margaret Morse Jones, Rachel Morse Williams  
Sitting Left: Margaret Evans Morse, William Morse, Mary Jane Morse, Sophia
Morse Hawkins Anderson

Not having many clothes she would wash her children’s clothing after they had
gone to bed on Saturday night I order to have them clean for Sunday.

Margaret was baptized into the Church at Logan, Utah in the winter of 1868. Ice
had to be broken or cut at the old mill to perform this ordinance. Later, at
Samaria she was an active worker in the Relief Society, being a teacher for
many years. She also did some temple work.

In the year, 1890, she made a trip back to Wales to visit her people. Some of
them still treated her with reserve and were not very sociable. She came back
from Europe sick and never did regain her health. She died August 11, 1893, and
was buried the Samaria Cemetery.

    Margaret Evans
    Born:    10 Oct 1836
    Married: William Morse, 8 Oct 1859
             He was born 6 June 1830

    Their third child was Emma Morse Price
    Born:    17 June 1865
    Married: John Evan Price, 15 Mar 1886
             He was born 18 Jan 1855.

    Their second child was John Morse Price
    Born:    1 Nov 1886
    Married: Ruth Williams, 9 Feb 1907
             He was born 27 Mar 1889

* * *

* From a CD from Jean Capener. (?)
* 24 Oct 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
