# Joel Hills Johnson - Journal

Joel Hills Johnson - Journal (covering the period from March 1861 to June 1882)

In March I went down to Virgin City with my wife Susan and planted out my city
lot to fruit trees and grape vines, and returned home on the last day of the
month. And in April I went to Salt Lake City with my wife Janet and had her
sealed to me in the endowment room across the alter by President Brigham Young,
and returned home on the 16th of May. In June I went down to Virgin City
accompanied by my wife Margaret and in company with my son Nephi and cleared
fenced made the water ditches for and planted four acres of land to Sugar Cane,
near the mouth of North Creek, and returned home in the fore part of July and
soon commenced harvesting my wheat, and continued at various kinds of farm
labors until some time in October when I moved my wife Margaret down to Virgin
City and having obtained a good Cane mill from the States through the aid of my
son Sixtus I went to work and made up my sugar cane into molasses.

In November, several of the missionary families that were called to Dixie
arrived in Virgin City with the Exploring Committee, Elders Branch, Whitmore,
and Golden, who were appointed to look out locations for settlement, mill
seats, etc, and by their urgent request I went with them to explore up North
Creek and on the mountains 15 or 20 miles above Virgin City whence we found a
plenty of good fine timber too good herds grounds and on North Creek six miles
above the City a good mill seat. I had secured myself about nine acres of land
across the river from town, besides the few acres before mentioned near the
mouth of North Creek and preparing to build me a house over the river and while
going to cut timber for that purpose I was met by Brother Snow and told to go
and build a sawmill up North Creek, so I gave up my land and prepared to fill
the mission he gave me.

About the first of December. I went up to my old place Fort Johnson to move
down my wife Janet and bring my sheep and other stock and I arrived back on the
22 of the same month. My first child by my wife Margaret was born in Virgin
city, Kane County, Utah, on the 23 of December 1862. at 11 o'clock, in the
evening. We gave her the name of Esther Ellis after the name of my mothers
mother.

On the 24th I moved my stock up North Creek to the place where the mill seat
was located. On the 25th the great rain commenced and continued about 40 days
and raised North Creek and Virgin River so high that hundreds of acres of good
farming lands along the course was carried away. I soon built a place to live
in and in January 1862 moved up my wife Janet. I then went to work clearing and
fencing land and in the spring went and brought down from my old place Fort
Johnson my stock of my orchard and nursery trees and planted them out on North
Creek and at the same time I rented out my old farm to my son Seth and moved
down my wife Susan to my place on North Creek.

January 5th, 1863. I moved my wife Margaret up to my place on North Creek,
while my wife Susan went down and stopped in my house in Virgin City. I then
hired hands and went to work at the mill in good earnest and had it completed
and running in the spring and in September I went with my wives Susan and
Margaret to Salt Lake City and attended the October Conference, and had
Margaret sealed to me in the endowment house. Across the Alter Brother Wilford
Woodruff officiated, and after visiting my friends and selling my house and lot
in Virgin City to my brother William B. Johnson of Salt Lake City, I returned
home in the latter part of November. In the fall and winter of 1863 and 64
there was a small town laid out on North Creek about one and a half miles below
the mill and named Mountain Dell which contained about 10-15 families.

August 17, 1865. My second child, Mary Elizabeth, by my wife Margaret was born
between 11 and 12 o'clock in the morning at my mill place near Mountain Dell,
Kane County, Utah. In the winter of 1865 my son Nephi (being President at
Virgin River City) came up and organized a branch of the church of about 40
members called the Mountain Dell branch, and I was appointed President with
Rufus Allen and William Isom my counselors.

November 4, 1865. This day my son James F. of 13 years of age received a very
severe accidental gunshot of cut slugs in his right heel which cut the cord and
bones of his heel mostly to pieces. Some of the slugs came out at the instep,
this accident was very painful and heart rending not only to himself but the
whole family. He was confined to his bed and to the house about six months
before he could walk.

The Navajo and other Indians having become very troublesome, the settlements
between the Colorado and Virgin River were all called to come in and the small
settlement in other places were counseled to come in strengthen up the larger
ones therefore the little town of Mountain Dell on North Creek had to be broken
up and moved to Virgin City.

Sometime about the first of June Brother Snow came up from St. George to visit
the settlements on the river and I invited him to come up and see my place at
the mill for I had built a good saw mill and had water sufficient to saw all
the logs that would ever be brought to it and water all the land that was worth
farming on the Creek. I also had planted about thirteen acres to various kinds
of fruit trees and grape vines, and had the best Apple orchard in all the
southern country and been to great labors in fencing, ditching, and making a
good farm and thought he would certainly appreciate my labors and acknowledge
my mission honorably fulfilled. But instead of that he censured me very highly
and said things that I don't feel to mention. And for what cause has never told
me, neither have I found out to this day. And when I saw that he did not
sustain me in the mission he gave me, when I knew that I had filled it
according to the best of my ability and knowledge I was sick at heart and
discouraged, and resolved to leave the place as soon as I could get it off from
my hands, for this cause I sold out to Joseph with William Black and made
writing on the 9th of July, 1866, I then moved my family down to Virgin City
into a cabin that I had built on my son Nephi's lot.

October 9, 1866. My sixth child Carlos by wife Janet was stillborn a fair full
grown child. And on the same day my oldest daughter my Janet, Janet Maure, was
married to Jesse N. Smith in the endowment house in Salt Lake City.

December 1, 1866. My third child by wife Margaret, Joseph Hills, was born about
1 o'clock in the morning at Virgin City. We stopped there through the winter in
the spring of 1867 I built a cabin across the river on the same ground I was
about to build the mill up North Creek. I also cleared off fenced and planted
to orchard trees vines and nursery stock about 5 or 6 acres of land on the
river bottom near by, which cost much labor for the ground was very uneven and
had to be leveled with the shovel.

The trees were large and many of them commencing to bear. In the fall I built
two adobe houses and built up the inside of my board cabin with adobes (which
was over twenty feet square) and made it into two rooms this with the two
houses that I had built made us good quarters for the winter. Sometime in the
latter part of December there was a heavy rain storm which raised the streams
tremendously and North Creek came up so high that it washed out one half or
three fourths of an acre of my orchard land opposite its mouth. This event
discouraged me in my prospects for an orchard and vineyard for I thought
perhaps the next flood of the same kind might sweep off my land and destroy all
my labors. I therefore concluded to seek a place somewhere else. Where I could
build and plant with more safety, and so I went down to St. George and look
about that place, Middleton, Washington, and Harrisburg, but could find no
place that suited me that I could purchase upon any reasonable terms.

Towards Spring Bishop Willis of Toquerville requested me to take a look at
South Ash Creek. So I done as he requested me and found the possibilities for
orchard and vine growing better than I expected, so I bought out Brother Ralph,
(the only settler at the place) and some other claims which amounted to about
thirty acres of land and cost me one thousand two hundred and fifty dollars.

March 1st 1868. I moved my wife Janet onto the place and commenced fencing and
planting out trees and vines ( I let my son Nephi have all that he could make
from my place on the river which had cost me over two thousand dollars in labor
and means, for getting water out again, for the flood had swept away the water
ditch.) I soon built a board cabin and got into it, which made us quite
comfortable for the summer.

July 6, 1868. This day myself and three wives attended the celebration of the
thirtieth anniversary of the departure of the remnant of the Saints that were
left at Kirtland in the Kirtland camp which occurred on the sixth of July 1838.
The Celebration took place in the Hall at St. George, the hall was densely
crowded with saints from the different settlements, many of the old members of
the camp were present. Some of which made short but appropriate and energetic
speeches upon the subjects of the persecution of the Saints, their expulsion
from Ohio, their journey through the states and arrival at Farr West in the
fall of 1838, when the saints were finally being expelled from Missouri, etc.

A little after twelve o'clock the whole assembly partook of an excellent dinner
prepared mostly by the old members of the camp, after dinner they all prepared
to another apartment where dancing and singing and speech making were kept up
until about 12 or one o'clock at night when all dispersed to their home. In the
fall I built two more cabins and moved my other wives Susan and Margaret over
from Virgin City and on the 16th of April 1869 Ezekiel, my fourth child by
Margaret was born about three o'clock in the evening at Bellevue, Kane County,
Utah. In the fall, I had very good crops although the locusts were very
troublesome, through the summer.

June 22nd, 1870. Myself with three wives, Susan, Janet, and Margaret and my son
James with two teams started for Salt Lake City and arrived at the City on the
second day of July and stopped at my brother William D. Johnson's and on the
sixth day Susan and myself with my sister Esther M. LaBaron went to the
endowment house and were baptized and sealed for the following persons: I was
baptized and sealed for Joseph Hills, Jabez Hills, Joseph Hills, Joel Hills,
and Enoch Forbush. Esther M. LaBaron was baptized and sealed for Esther Hills,
wife of Joseph Hills, Margaret Hills, wife of Jabez Hills, Milly Hills, wife of
Joseph Hills, Rhoda Hills, wife of Joel Hills, and Polly Forbush, wife of Enoch
Forbush.

Esther was also baptized for Julia and Annie Taft, both my cousins and were
both sealed to me. My wife Susan was baptized and sealed for Charlotte Fuller,
Pavney Lymon, Harriet Webster, and Lucy Holmes, all sealed to me

July 7th. Myself and three wives all went to the endowment house and received
our second anointing under the hand of President Daniel H. Wells.

July 9th. Susan, Janet and James started to go and visit our friends at Logan,
Cache County.

July 11th. Myself and Margaret started for home and arrived July 23 and found
those of my family there all well, but the water was mostly dried up so that
our crops was very poor this season. In the fall my brother William Johnson
from Salt Lake City with his family moved down to Washington in Washington
County, and my brother in law David T. LaBaron and family came down from the
city on a visit for the winter, and also my brother Benjamin F. Johnson and
family from Mona, Juab county, all came down on a visit through the winter, and
at Christmas we had a general family meeting the St. George Hall at St. George.
President Brigham Young, George A. Smith and Erastus Snow were present, the
house was crowded. We had supper in the evening after which we had speeches,
dancing, singing, etc. Had a good time and broke up about 12 o'clock.

January 2, 1871. I was ordained a Patriarch in the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints under the hands of President Brigham Young, George A. Smith
being the mouth. About this time President Young suggested to us that the
Johnson family have what was called the Spring Canyon Ranch twelve miles north
of Kanab for a stock race and for all the family who wished to settle there,
and requested us to go and look at it which we agreed to do as soon as we
conveniently could.

January 23rd, 1871. Myself being as St. George at the house of my brother
Joseph and most of the family being present, the requested me to give them
Patriarchal or Father's Blessings, which I did in the following order: Joseph
E. Johnson, Benjamin F. Johnson, George W. Johnson, William D. Johnson, David
T. Labaron, my sister, Esther M. LeBaron, Harriet Johnson, Eliza Johnson,
Benjamin F. Johnson, Jr., Horatio Picket, Esther Ellis LeBaron, and Nancy H.
Babbitt, being 14 in number. The above blessings are recorded in Book No. 1 of
the records of Patriarchal Blessings under the hand of Joel H. Johnson. The
next morning I started for home and arrived late in the evening, having
previously made arrangements to meet my brothers and some others at Virgin City
on our way out to look at Spring Canyon Ranch near Kanab, agreeable to the
request of President Young. We according went our and found a beautiful canyon
from half a mile wide several miles long covered with grass, with small springs
coming out at the bluffs on each side, and a small beautiful stream running
from the mouth of the Canyon, plenty of excelled grass for meadow and stock
range extending for many miles around. We were highly pleased with the place
and concluded to accept of the President's offer. Therefore we made
arrangements for some of us to move there in the Spring and start a cooperative
Stock Association for herding stock raising and dairy purposes, after which we
all returned home. In the latter part of March I moved my wife Susan and her
two boys Joel and Lamon out to Johnson and my brother William, who was stopping
at Washington moved out his family also and my brother Joseph sent out three
young men.

We took tolls, grain and seeds of many kinds for farming and gardening, and
also trees and vines for orchards and vineyards. My two oldest sons Sixtus and
Nephi also moved part of their families out and all went to work. Some to
planting out fruit trees and vines, some to building cabins, other to plowing,
planting, garden making, etc. I then started for home and met my brother
Benjamin at Virgin City on his way out to Johnson with farming tools or
implements, grains, seeds, etc.

Sometime in the month of March my brother-in-law George Wilson came up from the
muddy to my house and was taken sick with the mountain fever, and did not
recover until the last of April. And about the first of May we took a trip to
Johnson and found that the water had mostly died up and the prospect very small
to raise crops there, although the boys kept on planting and sowing and looking
for rain, we stopped a few days and came home and found that the grasshoppers
had destroyed all that I had planted.

Seeing the I was going to fail in both places to make a crop, I suggested to
Brother Wilson that we go and look out a place on which to build a saw mill (he
being a good millwright), he though it would be a good plan, so we started with
a team and went up by Parowan and over the mountain to Panguitch, we told
Bishop Sevy our business, and he though we had better build a mill eight miles
above that place on the Sevier River, but we concluded to go and look in Long
Valley for Brother Wilson had acquaintances there. So the next day we went on
our journey and stopped and looked at the place Brother Sevy mentioned on the
Sevier River. We found a good place for farming, a good mill sight and plenty
of good sawing timber nearby, but we went on over to Long Valley and found that
Joseph W. Young had agreed to build a saw mill there, so we crossed over the
mountain into Kanab Canyon and down to Kanab and out round to Johnson, and
found the boys nearly discouraged about making crops on account of the drought.
We stopped a few days and organized a Cooperative Stock Association, and then
we started for home down the Sevier River and my son David went with us and
when we came to the mill place we had looked out, we stopped and took another
look and concluded to make a permanent location there for farming and mill
building. We then came home and Brother Wilson moved his family to Panguitch.
They all took shares in the mill and went to work, and I agreed to furnish
provision and mill irons. In September I took out a load of Provisions and
brought out David's share of the mill and he went to Spring Lake Villa.

Almera W., my fifth child by my wife Margaret was born October 25, 1871, at 11
o'clock in the evening at Bellevue.

November 17, 1871. I went to St. George to see President Young and George A.
Smith and gave them a description of out place on the Sevier and an account of
what we are doing there. They were much pleased with what I told them and
instructed me to take out a surveyor and survey the land and a town plot and
get all the settles that I could.

December 31. Went to St. George and spent New Year's Day with my brother
Joseph, and returned home January 3rd. Weather very warm and beautiful for this
season of the year.

January 4th. Went to Virgin City to attend to home business and returned home
on Sunday the 7th of January.

Saturday 13th. Went to Toquerville and returned home next day.

February 20th. Went north to sell trees, vines, etc, at Harmony, gave a lecture
on fruit growing and vines and went out to Fort Hamilton and stopped all night
at Peter Fifes. Sold a few trees in the morning and went on to Parowan. Made a
few sales and returned home on the 25th.

March 13th. Started to move Janet to my mill place on the Sevier River which I
call Hillsdale, it being a valley between the hills. Hills also being a part of
my own name came to Parowan on the evening of the 14th. Attended the School of
the Prophets. On the 16th, gave them a lecture on the Word of Wisdom, etc.
Started for Panguitch on the 17th, arrived on the 18th and found Brother Wilson
and family all well. Stopped over night. Next day moved all up to Hillsdale.
Brother Wilson and family went into the house and Janet and family went into
the Blacksmith Shop, the next day we commenced anew our labors on the mill.
Joel went to Johnson and brought over the most of my stock, and then went to
Red Creek to Mill. I labored hauling timber for the mill, making garden, etc.
until the 22nd of April, when I started for home at Bellevue and arrived on the
26th and found all well.

May 10th. I went over to Virgin City to see the boys and do some business, and
returned home the next day.

May 13th. Started to go to Hillsdale in company with Brother James C. Snow,
surveyor for Kane County to survey up the land and lay out a town. Camped for
the night between Hamilton and Cedar City.

May 14th. Commenced raining early in the morning, rained till noon and then
commenced snowing, with cold wind in the north. Got to summit about the middle
of the afternoon. Stopped all night while it continued snowing and all the next
day, snow fell 19 or 20 inches deep, on the 16th went from Summit to Parowan.

May 17th. Brother Snow concluded to return home and I started for Hillsdale to
which place I arrived on Sunday 19th over dreadful roads. Stopped at Hillsdale
three weeks lacking one day, and started on the 8th of June and arrived home on
the 10th.

I will insert here a hymn written for March 23rd, 1872, that being my birthday
and seventy years of age.

    Patient waiting by the river
    For my Heavenly guide,
    To escort me safely over
    To my Father's side.
    Where a mansion my dear Savior
    Has prepared for me
    To inherit safe forever
    And from sorrow free.

    Oft my dear ones long departed
    Cross the fearful tide
    While my cheeks oft feel sweet kisses
    From my youthful bride.
    These to me are Heavenly Heralds
    Bringing glories dawn
    Golden Streams along the orient,
    Ushering in the moon

    Like the star that came to token
    Christ the Savior near,
    Filling me with Joy unbroken
    While I tarry here.
    Waiting still beside the river
    For my faithful guide,
    To escort me to my mansion
    On the Heavenly side.

July 20th. I started again to go to Hillsdale and arrived there on the 23rd,
and on the 24th went down to Panguich to attend the Celebration of the 24th of
July. Got there late. Services of the day mostly through. A part of the oration
and most of the toasts following were mine.

    The God of the Gentile,
    Gold, office, wine, and courtesans
    The God of the Saints
    Eloheim, truth, virtue and celestial lives.

The people had a first rate time, at the close all appeared satisfied and
happy, and I returned back to Hillsdale.

Monday August 25th. Edward Dalton, County Surveyor for Iron County, came over
to Survey land for the Hillsdale settlement. He laid out a small town plot and
surveyed a strip of land about 5 miles long, about equal distance each way from
the mill up and down the river and one hundred and ninety rods wide. I expected
to have started the mill before I left, but when we left the water into the
race or ditch we found that it would not carry a sufficient quantity to run it
therefore had to enlarge the race.

Wednesday August 7th. Started for home and arrived on Friday the 9th.

September 24th. I left home to go again to Hillsdale with a load of fruit and
arrived there on the 28th and found all well. Let out my share of the mill,
being three fourths to Nephi and Seth one year for half the profits. Settled up
my mill account with Brother Wilson and others. Found something due me besides
three fourths of the mill. I hauled a few logs. Sold lumber, raised a little
money, helped fix up a house for Janet and made arrangement to build one for
Susan. And started for Bellevue on the 13th or October. Stopped at Panguich all
night and arrived home on the 17th and found all well.

October 26th. The signs of the times and whisperings of the Spirit is to me,
that the keys of the resurrection will soon be given through Joseph, and the
spirit of my prayer has been almost hourly for the last few months in language
similar to the following lines.

    When my weakness Lord I see
    My poor heart is sickened
    Help me then to walk with thee
    That I may be quickened.

    Haste, Oh! Haste the glorious time
    Long by Saints expected
    When the pure in every clime
    Shall be resurrected

    May I see the looked for day
    And be with the number
    Who have walked the narrow way.
    Free from Death's cold slumber.

November 12th. Went to Virgin City to do business with Sixtus and Nephi. Sold
Nephi a yoke of oxen and bought four hives of bees and having bargained for two
hives sometime before I bought home six hives on the 14th.

January 19th, 1873. From the above date to the present I have labored on the
farm at Bellevue, building stables, fences, etc., preparatory for the summers
operations.

I wish here to say a few words about the education of my children as I have not
done it before, after I embraced the fullness of the Gospel in 1831, until I
came to Utah in 1848. I was driven about by persecuting mobs from place to
place not being allowed to stop but a few months or a year or so in a place and
often where there was no school. So that it was impossible for me to send them
to school but a little, and since I have been in Utah I have made eleven new
places of settlements, some of them I have made voluntarily, others I have been
called to make by the authorities of the Church, all of which I conscientiously
done for the advancing of the work of the Lord including the benefit of my
family. There being no schools for a year or two in those new places my
children were deprived of advancing their education, but always went to school
where there was any chance. But some of them would not take any interest in
gaining an education but had rather do almost anything else than to go to
school which gave me much sorrow for when I would try to encourage them they
would slight my counsel, if any of them ever complain of their father's neglect
in schooling them it will be those who never improved the opportunity that they
had.

### TO MY WIFE MARGARET

    Oh, Maggie my dear one thou wife of old age
    More precious thy kindness to me
    That friendship of kingdoms, of princes, or sages
    Or thousands in treasures could be.

    We met among strangers where friends were but few
    I asked you to stand by my side
    You promised forever, with love firm and true
    And soon you became my dear bride.

    When sickness and sorrow attended my way
    And enemies sought for my life
    They kindest attention and love was my stay
    As that of true faithful wife.

    The blessing of Heaven thy path shall attend
    And cause all thy sorrows to flee
    And never be lacking a true faithful friend
    Because of thy kindness to me.

January 21st, 1873. Went down to St. George to see the President so some other
business. Arrived there on the 22nd. Found the President just ready to start
for Virgin City, therefore could not see him until he returned. I then
concluded to stop and attend a two day meeting to be held on the following
Saturday and Sunday in the St. George Tabernacle. The house was crowded with
brethren and sisters from other settlements as well as St. George. The next
that the speakers mostly dwelt upon was "except ye are one, ye are not mine",
the most of the teaching was for the Saints to be one and cease working for,
and feeding the Gentiles. But let them alone and go to with their mights and
build up Zion. To cease hauling everything they had to spare to Peoche to build
up the Gentiles, but bring it to St. George and build up the Temple and Kingdom
of God. The President then called for all those who were willing to let Peoche
alone and not go there to work or haul anything to them, but would help build
up Zion, and had been in the Church forty years to rise up and hold up their
right hand, there was ten that arose. He then called for those that had been
members of the church 25 years and there was a good show, and so on down to
those that had been in the church 15 years, reducing five years each time, I
was truly thankful to see a beginning made to introduce the Saints today to the
first Commandment given to the Church, that was to "Come out of Babylon, Oh my
people, be ye Separate, TOUCH NOT, TASTE NOT, handle not of her unclean things"
this commandment of the Church as a people have never kept, for this cause we
have been mobbed and driven from place to place and still the spirit of
mobocracy is after us. We have constantly sought after unclean things of the
Gentiles of Babylon, such as their strong drinks, tobacco, tea, coffee, bacon,
and all the round of their canned and bottled fruits. and provisions, candies,
etc. With their clothing, fashions, manners, customs, and many of their
practices, while the Lord said that those things were unclean and not for the
good of man. And that the beauty of our apparel should be of the workmanship of
our own fingers. While we continue to follow after Babylon, the Spirit of
Babylon will follow us and our children and we can't help ourselves. I have
refused to use their unclean things and to follow their fashions for the last
forty years and have always preached against it and feel thankful that the
first step is taken to bring the Saints out of Babylon.

I returned home from St. George on Tuesday the 28th and on Friday the 31st went
down to Toquerviulle to do business with my son Seth and towards evening
partook of an excellent supper in the hall prepared for the President and
party, but the President was not there. I returned home on Saturday the 1st of
February.

April 11th, 1873. A few days back has been very cold and stormy with heavy
freezing. Apricots and peaches mostly killed. I started today to go to Parowan
to get some potatoes for planting and do some other business. Arrived there
about noon the next day being Saturday, done up my business satisfactorily, and
tarried over the Sabbath and preached to the people, and had a very interesting
time in showing the people their unwillingness to come out of Babylon according
to the commandments of God, and the Consequences that did and would follow.
They paid good attention and most of them seemed to receive the word with
gladness.

I started for home on Monday at noon and arrived home on Tuesday a little after
sundown. My wife Janet had come over from Hillsdale to Parowan where I found
her in tolerable good health and was very glad to see her, not having had the
privilege for nearly or quite six months.

### TO MY WIVES

    Oh, Susie dear, with love and cheer
    May all with thee be well
    My love for thee, while true to me,
    This tongue can never tell.

    And Jennie, love, Can I reprove
    Or say thou are untrue
    With love like mine, and virtue thine,
    I always shall say no.

    And Maggie, too, my love for you
    I cannot now express
    While thou to me shall faithful be,
    I shall thee love and bless.

    Should each prove true their work to do
    Like true and faithful wives
    Then all shall share, my love and care
    With crown of endless l lives.

June 5th, 1873. Started to go to Hillsdale with my little girl Mary, arrived at
Parowan on the 6th about noon. Got Brother Daniel Allen to repair my harness
and went on and camped for the night near the top of the mountain. Next day
arrived at Hillsdale and found all well.

I settled with George Wilson and bought out his share of the mill for which I
paid him five hundred dollars, mostly in stock. Rented the mill to Nephi and
Seth, some other necessary business and started for Bellevue on the Seventeenth
and arrived on the 20th. Found all well.

July 8th, 1873. A few days ago I received a letter from my sister Esther M.
LaBaron of Salt Lake City and with it her portrait. In my answer I wrote the
following lines.

### THE PORTRAIT

    When your dear portrait I beheld
    So smiling good and true
    My heart with joy and love was filled
    It seemed so much like you.
    But when I kissed it oft so sweet
    I felt within a pain
    Because there was no love too great
    And kiss me back again.

August 12th, 1873. My health has become uncommonly good this summer so far, my
mind has been a little exercised this morning with the following.

### THOUGHTS ON SMALL THINGS

    A Whispered word the heart may cheer
    And in despair give hope
    A look of love may banish fear
    and lift the sinking up.

    Scorn not the simplest word or deed
    Lest some good thought you spoil
    There's life to spring in every seed
    When hid beneath the soil.

    Your words and acts; no one can guess
    How great their force may be
    Nor what results may crown and bless
    Those who are blessed by thee.

    Work on despair not; let your mite
    Of wisdom, love and care
    Be given to all who would do right
    God then will hear your prayers.

August 17th. Today, I baptized and confirmed my second daughter by my wife
Margaret (Mary Elizabeth), being nine years old today. I also wrote the
following short poem entitled:

### THE GEM

    There is a precious treasure,
    Its value never told.
    That all may own at pleasure,
    Yet never bought or sold.

    This jewel too, will make you,
    A true and faithful friend.
    And never will forsake you,
    In time, or at its end.

    Will never brook denial,
    Of what is just and tie.
    And every story and trial,
    Will bring you safely through.

    While all in every station,
    In childhood, age, and youth.
    Through it may gain salvation,
    This precious gem, is truth.

October 28th, 1873. Today my daughter Susan Martineau with her oldest son Henry
and four small children arrived at house from Logan, Cache County, Utah. I was
very glad of her visit having not seen her for twelve years. She stopped a week
and went over to Virgin City to visit her sister Sariah Workman and stopped
with her a weekend and returned.

November 15th. Today my daughter Susan with my wife Susan and her son Joel and
Henry Martineau started for Hillsdale. I sent with them the following lines to
my wife Janet who had refused to come and stay with me through the winter while
my wife Margaret should go to Hillsdale for her children to attend school.

### TO JANET

    My heart with pain is filled today
    For one, long years so good and kind
    Now from my council turn away
    And to my wishes not resigned
    Tears only now my grief can tell
    Yet wish my long loved darling well.

    The Lord forgive thee is my prayer
    And help thee to obey my will
    And seek my love and tender care
    That I may love and bless thee still.
    Wile of the Lord thou shalt be blessed
    With light and love shall f ill thy breast.

    Then cleave to me with all thy heart
    And let no evil spirit dare
    To cause our friendship to depart
    And crowns of glory thou shalt wear
    With me when mortal life is past
    And while eternity shall last.

December 30, 1873. My health has been very poor the last two weeks, not able to
do any work. On the third day of this month there commenced a dreadful snow
storm, such as has never been known in this country. It last six days snowing
night and day but melting a good deal at the same time. Which left it hard on
the ground from twenty inches to two feet deep, which made the roads impassable
for several days and took much labor to break them so that teams could pass.
Many loads of potatoes on the road between Bellevue and Kanarrah were left and
froze solid. The snow still covers the ground from eight to ten inches deep.

March 23rd. It has been a very cold stormy winter. Therefore, much stock has
died on the range this winter in many places. My health has been tolerably good
this far. This being my seventy second birthday, I jot down the following.

### MUSINGS

    In the evening pure and holy
    Oh my lifes declining day
    I am sitting sweetly musing
    Over Scenes long passed away
    Thinking of the one that pledged me
    Her sweet love while life should last
    Since the day that we were wedded
    Nearly fifty years have passed.

    Memory brings her oft before me
    As she was when gay and young
    And still hear the pleasing accounts
    Falling from her joyful tounge.
    Death soon took her from my bosom
    Over my life a gloom to cast
    Since my cottage was made lonely
    Nearly forty years have passed.

    While the holy recollections
    Of the time she passed away
    Never can be driven from me
    By the shadows of the day.
    Yes my love for her how sweetly
    It doth with me live and last
    Since I felt its Heavenly wooing
    Nearly fifty years have passed.

    Now I feel the Heavenly portals
    Opening to me here below
    And the glory streaming through them
    Earthly beings seldom know.
    For I hear her sweetly singing
    Feel the kiss she first imprinted
    Nearly fifty years have passed.

    Sweet the voices of my loved ones
    Stealing through the mists of time
    Wafted by the Holy Zephyrs
    From the pure Celestial clime.
    Patient waiting for my exit
    Life cannot much longer last
    Since my friends announced my birthday
    Two and seventy years have passed.

April 9, 1874. This day my sixth child of my wife Margaret was born at a
quarter past ten o'clock in the evening, being her third son. 17th. Today I
blessed my little son, it being the eighth day since he was born and called his
name Jeremiah, it being given by inspiration several months before he was born.

June 30th. Today I started to go to Hillsdale with my wife Susan. Went to
Hamiltons Fort and stopped at Sister Fifes all night. Went to Parowan next day
and stopped all night. Next morning started on, and camped for the night. Next
morning started on, and camped for the night in the canyon below Bear Valley.
Next day arrive at Hillsdale about noon on Friday. On Sunday preached to the
people and blessed two infant grandchildren, one the son of my Nephi, and the
other the son of my son David, and on Tuesday the 7th of July, started home and
arrived on Friday the 10th.

Saturday the 11th there came over Bellevue the worst hail storm I ever saw
making almost entire destruction of all kinds off fruit and vegetation.

August 12th. Today feeling as though my daughter Sariah was in grief. I wrote
her an encouraging letter with the following lines.

### TO MY DAUGHTER SARIAH

    God bless you my daughter forever
    With comfort in sorrow and care
    And power with trials to severe
    That fills your kind heart with despair.

    The Lord will soon come in His glory
    To end the Saints bondage and strife
    And John will come too! and restore thee
    To mansions prepared for his wife.

    Be patient and faithful in duty
    No honors are found in this world
    Like diadems forming with beauty
    To crown you with glory, dear girl.

August 3, 1879. The following lines are written and sent to my sister Ester M.
LeBaron of Salt Lake City and should have been recorded before the last date.

### TO MY SISTER

    Do you remember dearest sis
    That quaint old house where you were bred
    And where I gave you many a kiss
    Of love, and blessing on your head
    Before your childhood days were fled.

    The little brook that rippled by
    Amid the grass and flowers so sweet
    A mothers hand too! always nigh
    To safely guide your wandering feet
    And make your presence all complete.

    The heavens above so clear and blue
    With souls sweet ways to cheer and light
    The play grounds that your footsteps knew
    While seeking flowers so pure and bright
    Which filled your heart with sweet delight.

    Still that dear spot with grass so green
    And sweetest flowers s till bloom as fair
    As when we left the place I wean
    Where friends had spent much toil and care
    Oh! Shall we ever more be there.

    Our joys pass by, and so does Spring
    Gives place to bring the summer near
    And Lo! the birds loose heart to sing
    When autumn leaves are brown and sear
    Which shows that winter ports are near.

August 25, 1874. Today there came over Bellevue another heavy hail and rain
storm, which done much damage to what fruit and vegetables there were left from
the other storm of the 11th of July.

August 27th. Today I wrote the following little poem entitled.

### ALMERA

    Through the orchard lies Almera
    Little maiden with light hair
    Gathering apples with ripe peaches
    That are falling here and there.
    Searching grapes and flowers in garden
    Laughing in her childish glee
    Teasing all her little playmates
    Who so full of joy as she.

    Thee times has the vintage fruited
    Since she came into our cot
    When our hearts all made joyful
    That her care should be our lot.
    May the Holy Spirit guide here
    That it may with her be well
    Until she returns to glory
    When she came with us to dwell.

August 28th.

### TO OUR LITTLE JEREMIAH

    Another little darling
    Is sent to us from heaven
    His name is Jeremiah
    By inspiration given.

    The holy spirit whispered
    Ere we his face did see
    To name and bless a stranger
    A prophet he shall be.

    To share the holy mantle
    Of him whose name he takes
    Like him to give the message
    To whom Jehovah speaks.

    Oh then, our little darling
    With wisdom, love and grace
    Our father will sustain you
    And help you fill your place.

October 1, 1874. My feelings today are represented in the following.

### PRAYER

    Oh God to thee ascends my prayer
    At morning, noon, and eve
    This through thy hand of love and care
    Each blessing I receive.

    Then let thy spirit Lord abide
    Forever in my breast
    And be my ever faithful guide
    To my eternal rest.

    Fill oh, fill my thirsty soul
    With wisdom, love and peace
    And every act of life control
    And all my joys increase.

    Oh let no evil ones combine
    My faith to overthrow
    But fill my heart with light devine,
    Their councils all to know.

    And may true righteousness abound
    In me, thy law to fill
    And every deed and work be found
    Responsive to thy will.

    May I be with the quickened ones
    Who have the truth maintained
    Rise in the cloud and owned thy Sons
    With crowns and kingdoms gained.

There was another dreadful hail storm at about four o'clock this afternoon, and
destroyed much of the fruit left from the other storms. My prospects for bread
and clothing for a large family mostly cut off but it is the Lords business to
provide and he knows what is for our best good.

October 3rd. I thought today I would jot down the following prayer which has
been running in my mind for the last two days.

### A PRAYER

    Father oh! remember me
    Bless me with thy keeping
    Grant that I may never be
    In the cold grave sleeping.

    May I see the glorious day
    Longby Saints expected
    When old things are passed away
    And the new prespected.

    With old Satan in his chain
    And in prison staying
    While over earth the Lord shall reign
    And all Him obeying.

### SMILES AND KIND WORDS

    More welcome than sunshine
    Dispersing each cloud
    Is the smiles of a friend
    When our cares on us crowd.

    Yes brighter than sunshine
    With light to impart
    Is a kind uttered word
    To a woe stricken heart.

### ALL'S WELL WITH ME

    Oh! Father as I fall asleep
    Thy spirit's light to me impart
    Forgive my sins and safely keep
    From sin my heart.

    Let some kind spirit guard my bed
    And make my peace and rest complete
    Thy love and kindness over me spread
    Sleep then is sweet.

    At peace with all the world and thee
    No fears, dear Lord, my faith can shake
    All's well which side the grove for me
    Daylight may break.

December 1, 1874. Today I baptized and confirmed my little son Joseph Hills he
being eight years old today. He is to become a printer and publisher not only
of my book but many others brought forth by the Saints of the last day, and is
to become a great man in Israel by publishing the Gospel to many people. The
Lord bless him forever.

December 27, 1874. Today my feelings are composed in the following.

### PRAYER

    Upward Oh! Lord I stretch my hand
    In solemn prayer to thee
    To send some messenger of love
    And show thy will to me.

    And fill my soul with living faith
    Combined with love that's pure
    To cleanse and purify my heart
    Thy friendship to secure.

    Thy faith thine ancient Saints possessed
    That lives and never ends
    And make them living friends to thee
    For thou wilt bless thy friends.

March 23, 1875. Being my birthday and 73 years of age I wrote the following.

### PEACE OF MIND AND CONFIDENCE IN GOD

    I would not loose my peace of mind
    For all the proud calls good and great
    Or change the lot to be assigned
    For kingdoms with their pomp of state.

    Or loose my Heavenly Father's love
    For all the earth can give or fame
    Or loose His smiles and kind approve
    To gain of man the noblest name.

    Or loose my home and friends so dear
    On Zions mount all power to gain
    Or loose the Saints sweet love and cheer
    For all the treasure Kings obtain.

    Or loose my thankfulness to God
    For blessing I from Him receive
    Of wives and children loved and good
    For all the glory earth can give.

In the afternoon my sons Nephi and Seth came over from Hillsdale. Also Sixtus
and Joel from Johnson with my wife Susan and her son David from Toquerville,
all came to visit father on his birthday. I was very glad to see so many of my
family together once more.

March 24th. We all took dinner together and had a good time in the afternoon.
We all came together with those that are there and I organized them into the
order of the sons of Joel. I was chosen president, Sixtus and Nephi being
counselors, and Seth, secretary. The object of this organization is to enter
into an organized system of keeping a record of and educating the sons and
daughters of Joel and to keep them from running astray after habits, fashions,
customs, and the unclean things of the Gentiles and to observe strictly the
laws, rules, and customs of the Saints of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter
Day Saints.

December 6th, 1875. Since the last date I have labored mostly on my farm, made
tolerable good crops. My health has been tolerably good for an old man.
Yesterday attended meeting at Brother Sylvesters, confirmed three children that
had been baptized and blessed a small child of Brother Joseph A. Birch. Gave
him the name of George A. Sylvester Birch. Our prayer to God has been day and
night for a long time to give me wisdom, knowledge, and power to know and do
his will on the earth and to escape the power of the destroyer and live to see
the time when there shall not be a dog to move his tounge against the pure in
heart in all his holy mountain.

December 15th. I have not written much since I returned from my mission to the
states in 1860. Since that time my health has been better that it had been for
many years. Since then I have been moved about by council and my own judgement
so often that I have had but little time or opportunity to write, neither have
I had a convenient place for that purpose and have had to labor almost
unceasingly to support my family having but little or no means to go on or to
assist me. Nevertheless, I have written a few poems now and then.

January 5, 1876. I went to St. George to do some business and had a very rainy
time. Stopped with my brother Joseph E. Johnson until Saturday. I went down and
saw the temple, did my business, and returned to Hannah Johnson's at
Washington. Gave her a Patriarchal or Fathers blessing, also her son in law
William Gott. I also blessed the two little children of James Carlton son in
law to my brother Joseph.

March 15th, 1876. Received a telegram from Salt Lake City informing me that my
sister Esther M. LeBaron had died in the morning at 7 o'clock.

    Adieu dear sister thou art gone
    Depart friends of ours to meet
    Our work for them to forward on
    And their redemption made complete.

March 23rd, 1876. Today being my 74th birthday, I expected all my sons and many
others of my family to meet at my house to celebrate the occasions by coming to
a better understanding of and assisting to perfect the order of the sons of
Joel, but was very disappointed for only David, Joel, and Almon of my sons were
there with Henry Martineau, my grandson. David's and Henry's wives with Anna
Hilton my granddaughter and Nancy Riggs my niece were present. There were all
except my two wives Janet and Margaret with their children. We had no records
of the last meeting, therefore done no business. After dinner we all met
together and I gave them a lecture on various subjects, appertaining to a
common course off conduct and family matters. We had a good time although but
few were present. In the evening I gave a fathers blessing to my oldest
daughter, Sariah and also to Anna Hilton, my granddaughter, and to Almon B., my
youngest son by my wife Susan.

April 6th. Today my seventh child by my wife Margaret was born at half past
five o'clock in the morning, a daughter.

April 17, 1876. Today I bless my little daughter and gave her the name of
Margaret Hannah. God bless her forever

    And shield her from strife
    His spirit too! give her
    To guide her through life.

May 12th, 1876. I went to st. George and stopped with my brother J.E. Johnson
and attended conference on Saturday and Sunday and heard Presidents Young and
Wells preach with several others of the Elders who gave a first rate
instruction while the spirit of the Lord was truly manifest among speakers and
hearers. I had a very good time and returned home on Tuesday 16th. While there
I gave blessings to several of my kindred and on my return, found my son in law
James H. Martineau at my house very sick with cough and pain in his breast.
Laid hands on him and he seemed much better. I also gave him a patriarchal or
fathers blessing.

May 31st. Last night a terrible wind blew like a hurricane all night, and
strewed the ground with apples, pears, peaches, plums, and cherries, and all
kinds of tree fruit. Grape vines terribly whipped to pieces and many apple
trees nearly stripped of their foliage.

June 21st, 1876. Wednesday evening, my son James F. Johnson and Mary J Wilson
were married at his mothers house by myself.

June 24th. I went to Kanarrah on business. Preached to the people on Sunday.
Had a very good time with good attention from the people and returned home on
Monday.

September 15th, 1876. My health is very good for an old man for which I am very
thankful.

    What honors can there ever be
    That I can render unto thee
    What homage bring
    For health and blessings long and gree
    That Thou hast granted unto me
    Oh God, my King.

November 3rd, 1876. Feel very much the effects of old age but still feel strong
hopes that I shall live to see the quickening time when Satans reign shall end
and hear my Father say to me enough  
Take your station higher  
Break the bands of Satan off  
And to me come higher.

March 23, 1877. Had lines written for my 75th birthday not recorded through mistake.

March 27th, 1877. Today at 12 o'clock, Mary Elizabeth, my second daughter by my
wife Margaret died aged twelve years, seven months and ten days, being born on
the 16th of August, 1864. She was a faithful, dutiful, loving, and affectionate
child and faithful saint and was far the best scholar I ever had in my family
of her age.

    The morn was bright but all was dark
    For grief and tears filled every eye
    The shaft of death had pierced its mark
    And sundered many a kindred tie.

    For there she lay our dearest friend
    Our daughter in the bloom of life
    Her toils and cares all at an end
    And she beyond this world of strife.

    Our child whose sun did rise so clear
    Hath set in darkness ere the noon
    Her care and love so kind and ear
    Has passed away! that heavenly boon.

At Mary's death, Esther was sick nigh unto death with the same disease and had
been all through her sickness. Several of the other children also were sick,
and my health was very poor indeed. We had no family gathering on my birthday,
therefore, done no business in regard to the order of the sons of Joel.

April 15th, 1877. My health continues very poor. Not able to do any business of
consequence and we all feel very lonesome and sad on account of Mary's death.

July 1st, 1877. This morning a little domestic gloom fell up my household. Ah,
ha, such is life.

### THE CAUSE

    Good Adams greatest wishes
    To do his Fathers will,
    By Eve was disregarded
    While gloom upon them fell.

    The greatest imposition
    On man as time records
    Is wives while disregarding
    The wishes of their Lord.

December 26, 1877. Today my oldest daughter by my wife Margaret was married to
Samuel Orton in the Temple at St. George. God bless them forever with long life
and peace  
Like Abraham's seed may their offspring increase.

January 7, 1878. Oh! how my heart pangs for, and longs, the time to come, when
I shall cast off the effects of mortality, sin, sorrow, sickness, pain and
death, or as Paul has it "The body of this sin and death." When I can amount
upon wings as an Eagle (as the Prophets have said) "And run and not be weary
and walk and not faint. And go from Nation to Nation, from City to City and
from town to town, and from house to house and to the ends of the earth, to
preach the news of Salvation to the honest, and to become one of the Angles
(Within life or death) That Christ will send forth at His Second Coming to
gather up His elect or pure in heart, from the four corners of the earth. Those
messengers I think are yet to be called and qualified for that purpose.

    How long, dear Father shall it be,
    I ask thee! (now again)
    Before I shall have power from thee
    To cast off Satans chain.

    That it may on his neck be placed
    A thousand years to stay
    For which may time more swiftly haste
    And bring the welcome day.

    When all the Saints shall thus be freed
    And the millennial morn
    Shall usher in, and Christ indeed
    Again to earth return.

    Old Satan bound, cannot go forth
    To tempt men to rebel
    While all the nations of the earth
    In peace and safety dwell.

January 27th. Attended meeting at Brother Sylvesters and had a good time in
speaking to the Saints. After meeting blessed two children, one belonging to
Joseph Birch and the other to Erastus McIntire.

### A PRAYER

    Dear Father hear my constant cry
    That thou wouldst unto me draw nigh
    And fill my soul with light
    And the full power of endless life
    To guide me through this world of strife
    That none my peach may blight

    And grant me power, and on me seal
    The gift of faith the sick to heal
    Foul spirits too! displace
    That deaf and lame may hear and walk
    The blind and dumb too see and talk
    And give to God the praise.

February 1st, 1878.

### SONGS OF PRAISE

    Praise God the Father, King of Kings
    Praise God the Son who freely brings
    Salvation to all
    Praise to the Comforter be given
    Sent to direct all those to Heaven
    Who hear the Gospel call
    I'll praise the Father and the Son
    And Holy Comforter as one
    While on the earth I stay
    And should I stop behind the veil
    My songs of praise shall never fail
    In worlds endless day.

March 22nd, 1878. My mind for the past two days has been occupied in writing my
seventy sixth birthday review, which is recorded in another book.

March 23rd. This being my birthday my sons Sixtus and Nephi with their wives
(or parts of families) and Joel and Almon came over from Johnson with Sariah my
oldest daughter from Virgin City to Celebrate their father's birthday, it being
my 76th. We had dinner at 2 o'clock and the next morning I gave Patriarchal or
Father's blessings to several of my family. In the afternoon we met together to
talk over and counsel about family matters. I gave them counsel and instruction
and we were all edified and blessed. The next day all returned home.

Tuesday 25th. Today my eight child by my wife Margaret was born at four o'clock
in the morning, a son.

April 2nd. Today I blessed my little son and named him Amos Partridge. Amos
after the old Prophet Amos.

    And still another pet lamb
    Is added to our fold
    Who shall be priest and prophet
    As Amos was of old
    Whose name we freely give him
    And unto his restore
    The priesthood power and mantle
    That ancient prophets were.

April 25th. Today I married my daughter Margaret by my wife Janet to David Frederick.

    God bless and preserve them
    From folly and strife
    With bountiful increase
    And pleasure through life.

July 3rd, 1878. I write the following lines to represent my present thoughts
and feelings.

    My heart doth rejoice in
    My blessings today
    I'm rich as the richest
    For this I can say
    My Father in Heaven
    All needful doth send
    The virtuous love me
    And He is my friend.
    My conscious closer as
    The rays of the sun
    I never have fear of
    A foe have I one
    For He and His Servants
    Are greater than all
    And everything evil
    Before them shall fall.

October 27th, 1878. Blessed the infant daughter of James H. Carlton and gave
the name of Diadama Wheeler.

    God bless the little innocent
    And ever be her friend
    Long life and pleasure give her
    And offspring without end.

November 21st, 1878. When I look around and see the sinfulness and folly of the
young men of Israel who profess to be, and should be Saints, how my heart is
pained for the cause of Zion. Oh! Zion when I love with all my heart and soul.
How are thy sons and daughters becoming defiled with the customs and fashions
of their gentile neighbors. With repentance and forsaking of their follies, thy
beautiful land will soon be laid waste by those enemies.

### A PRAYER

    Father let me be endowed
    With the grace expected
    When all knees to thee are bowed
    And with love perfected
    May I live on earth to see
    Heavenly love and union
    Shared by all and all with thee
    Having sweet communion
    Hasten on the glorious day
    With its love and blessing
    When old things are passed away
    And the new progressing.

January 1st, 1879. This completes my 76th New Years Day. How many more shall I
see in this probation I know not. The Lord's will be done and not mine. Few or
many, my feelings today is set forth in the following prayer.

    Through works with faith and love combined
    May I Oh! Lord not come behind
    The chiefest of thy faithful one
    Who are or may be owned thy sons.

    Inspire me in thy holy cause
    To know and understand the law.
    That will unite thy Saints in one
    In the true order of thy son.

    That all may work with one accord
    Not for themselves, but for the Lord
    Then Zion will arise and shine
    And fill the earth with light divine.

January 11th, 1879. Today I started on the mission given my by President John
Taylor together up my family and colonize them at some place in Arizona, and
organize them in the unified order. I went to Virgin City and stopped for the
night, held meetings at the usual place, gave a lecture to the people, had a
large gathering, good attention, and a good time. Next day drove to Cedar Ridge
and camped for the night. The next day drove to Kanab and stopped for the
night. Had no meeting, their house had just been painted inside and not fit for
use. Next day drove to Johnson and stopped with my son Nephi, my sons came
together. I instructed them in relation to the mission given my by President
Taylor, they all seem willing to hearken.

January 15th. Had meeting. Had a good congregation and good attention. Preached
to the people several times many of them seemed to take an interest in my
Arizona mission. I gave Patriarchal blessings to about 30 of my kindred and
friends and started for home on Monday 20th, and came to Kanab and preached in
the evening to a large and attentive congregation. The next morning my son Seth
came over from Hillsdale to see me and I stopped with him through the day and
blessed several most of my kindred and friends. Started the following morning
and camped in t he evening at Cedar Ridge and the next day came to Virgin City
and preached in the evening to a good congregation and had a good time and
arrived home on Friday the 24th of January 1879.

    Heavenly Father fill thy servant
    With he gift of inspiration
    To advance to cause of Zion
    In the work of her salvation.

    Lo! her foes are strong and many
    Who have long her cause mistreated
    Help me wage eternal warfare
    Till they all shall be defeated.

February 11th, 1879. On the 30th of January six days after my return from
Johnson, my little son Jeremiah was taken sick with Diphtheria and died on the
eighth of February. Aged four years and ten months lacking one day. While sick
he often called for his father to bless him, which I did. I often went by
myself in secret prayer in his behalf, but could get no testimony that he would
recover, and when I saw that he was to be taken from me, I asked the Lord what
I should do with the promise he made me before he was born. When he told me to
go bless him and give him the name of Jeremiah and ordain him a Prophet, and
thus came the answer "Go and ordain him a High Priest and anoint him a King and
Priest to God, He is still able to give his word to the nations and assist to
gather his elect from the four winds of the earth." So I saw at once that the
Lord was taking all the purest spirits back again behind the veil to place them
in a school directed by the Prophets and the spirits of just men made perfect,
to prepare them for the great work still before them. They come to take
tabernacles and are taken away again because they cannot be trained up unto the
Lord, where hypocrisy, profanity and other wickedness is practiced among those
who profess to be saints.

    Father save the pure in heart from all evil
    While the wicked have their part, with the Devil.

February 23rd. Started to go to Parowan, went as far as Kanarrah and preached
to the people in the evening. Had a fine congregation who paid good attention
to what was said and had a good time. Next day went to Parowan and preached to
the people there on the evening of the 25th and had a large congregation who
paid good attention to what was said and seemed well edified. The next day
started for home and arrived on the 27th.

### OUR LOVED ONES DEAD

    How quietly they sleep
    Where nothing can molest
    Their eyes with tears no more can weep
    So perfect is their rest.

    They never more can know
    The grief they used to share
    Their ears are deaf to every woe
    That mortals have to bear.

    Their tongues and lips a re still
    And cannot move again
    Where once their kisses gave a thrill
    There's naught but grief and pain.

    But soon from out yon cloud
    That then will wrap the skies
    Will Michael call both long and loud
    And bid our dead arise.

    Their forms divinely fair
    Will leap forth from the tomb
    To meet their friends where e'er they are
    All in immortal bloom.

March 16, 1879. Started in company with my wives Susan and Janet and daughter
Esther with my son David and family to go to St. George to do some Temple Work
for ourselves and dead. Drove to Harrisburg and camped for the night. Next day
arrived at St. George.

March 18th. Commenced work in the Temple. I received endowments in behalf of my
father. We labored in the Temple for ourselves and dead until Friday afternoon
and returned home.

March 24th. Started with my wife Margaret and child and little son Ezekiel to
go to Hillsdale. Stopped with Brother Allen at Kanarrah overnight. Next day
went to Parowan and stopped with my sister. Next day went to Panguitch and
stopped with Alma Barney and on the 27th arrived in Hillsdale about noon.
Preached in the evening to the people who gave good attention. Next day looked
about some to see some to see what I had better do. For I had understood that
Brother Taylor had finally left the matter of my Arizona mission to Brother
Snow who decided that I had pioneered enough and was too old to make a new
settlement in the new country. He counseled me if I wished to leave Bellevue to
Hillsdale and build a flouring mill.

March 29th. Preached to the people again in the evening and next morning
started for home and came to Panguitch on Sunday the 30th and preached to the
people at 2 o'clock and had a good congregation and a good time. Next day
started for home and came to Parowan and preached in the evening to a good
congregation and had a good time in speaking and attention from the people.
Arrived home on Wednesday, April 2nd, 1879.

April 7th, 1879. Bargained or sold my farm orchards, vineyards, etc. to Andrew
F. Grogerson for the sum of $3,000.

April 9th. Today my daughter Julia Ann Orton died in childbirth at Parowan. Her
child, a daughter, was stillborn. She left eight children and had lost four. I
attended her funeral on the eleventh. Her corpse was carried directly to the
graveyard. All Parowan seemed to be there. An immense congregation. I stepped
up into a wagon and spoke to them, about twenty minutes, and I seldom saw such
a gust of grief in my life as was manifest from old and young, male and female
with the general expression. She was such a good woman. She was a kind,
virtuous, and faithful companion, a tender loving and affectionate mother. Her
loss can never again be made good to her husband, children and friends, until
she takes up her tabernacle again in the resurrection.

    Dear lovely daughter sweetly rest,
    Till Michael calls thee forth,
    With those that are, and shall be blessed
    To reign with Christ again.

April 18th. Started for Hillsdale and arrived there on Monday, the 21 expecting
to meet my son Nephi there, but was disappointed. Done some business in regard
to the mill, building and moving. Preached to the people on Sunday the 27th and
started for home on Monday, and arrived on the first day of May.

May 21, 1879. It has never been so dry at this season of the year since my
acquaintance with Bellevue. At the present time, every green thing seems to be
drying up. Only a small stream of water once a day from the mountains. If no
rain comes we shall soon be without water. My testimony for the last forty
eight years has been and still is: that I know that God lives, for I have felt
his hand and heard his voice. I also know that in the dispensation of fullness
of the Gospel brought forth through Joseph Smith is God's handy work! For his
voice has declared it unto me! This is my living and dying testimony to every
human being upon the face of the whole earth, even so, Amen. Joel H. Johnson,
High Priest in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, the only living
church of God on the earth.

    Since Lord thou hast the truth restored
    Through Joseph in my youth
    I've sought to live by every word
    Proceeding from thy mouth.

    While sitting by him day or night
    The words of life to hear
    My heart was filled with love and light
    Devoid of doubt and fear.

    I know that every word was true
    Through thy sweet voice to me
    And now to all the fact renew
    That dwell on land or sea.

June 5th, 1879. Started for Hillsdale in company with my little son Ezekiel,
who drove my carriage and also with my son in law David Frederick who drove a
team for me loaded with dried fruit and dry goods which I took over to pay for
work on the mill. But when I came there I was told by my son Seth that on
account of the extreme drought at Johnson and vicinity, President Snow had
released my son Sixtus from the office of Bishop at Johnson and advised him to
move his flocks of sheep, goats, and cattle into Arizona and told him that I
had better go with him if I still wanted to go. I then drove over to Johnson to
see my son Sixtus on the subject, and consulting with him on the subject, I
concluded to give up mill building and moving to Hillsdale and go to Arizona
with my son Seth to sell for me and preached to the people on Sunday June 15th
and found that there was no water within three or four miles of the place only
what was hauled from Toquerville. With front trees and vegetables of every kind
all drying up and dying.

July 12th, 1879. Such a terrible drought I have never known before in my life
all kinds of vegetation is drying up and dying with fruit and leaves drying and
falling from the trees, there has been no rain to do good or water in the
streams since May. I have had to haul all my water from Toquerville since the
first of June, never saw the sky so blue as it has been for the last two
months. In the summer before in my life I have planted nothing this season on
account of the drought and shall raise nothing. The following lines speaks my
feelings today.

    Dear Lord while I upon thee call
    Make known thy will to me
    That I may justify do I with all
    And humbly walk with thee.

    Be merciful, true, just, and kind
    More loving, meek, and mild
    More to thy heavenly will resigned
    And like a faithful child.

    Give me more wisdom, faith, and grace
    To know and love thee still
    And faithful labor in each place
    That I am called to fill.

July 24th. Yesterday there fell a little rain up north with a small sprinkle
here which did but very little good, there was a small stream came down North
Ash Creek a little of which I run on to some of my fruit trees and vines. The
prospect looks very poor for any more rain. I feel to render to my Heavenly
Father this morning the following lines, song of Praise.

    Praise God from whom all good proceeds
    Praise him all ye, of righteous deed,
    Praise him all things that live on earth
    Praise him ye hosts of heavenly birth

    Praise to the Son our Lord from Heaven
    Praise to the Holy Ghost be given
    Praise to the three, the great I am
    Praise Heaven and Earth, His Holy name.

There was no celebration here. The most of the people having moved away on
account of the drought.

July 28th. Still have to haul water from Toquerville, seven miles over a
terrible road, to answer all the requirements of household economy, which
brings upon me a very heavy tax. The Lords hand seems to be upon us for our
wickedness. He is taking away many of our little ones by Diphtheria and other
diseases, and sending drought upon many parts of the territory. Some of the
people who profess to be Saints think that it is no matter what they do if they
are not cut off from the church. Therefore, they will lie, steal, cheat, rob,
and do anything by which they can get money, and if they can keep in the church
they are all right. And there is so many of them that abode or assist each
other that it is very difficult to catch them. These things cause a great loss
of confidence and much disunion among the Saints. By this means as a people
come very far short of constituting Zion which the Lord says is the pure in
heart.

### LOVE FOR ZION

    Oh Zion, how I love
    Thy great and holy cause
    Could I thy wicked foes remove
    And safe enforce thy laws.

    How would I leap for joy
    And labor day and night
    Their evil works all to destroy
    And put their hosts in flight.

    That Zion may arise
    And cause her light to spread
    Till every people in surprise
    Shall find her at the head.

    Then let her cause roll forth
    Oh, Father, and prevail
    Till all the nations of the earth
    Shall find themselves the tail.

August 17th. This terrible drought continues. South wind almost scorching hot.
The large yellow hornets are terrible thick. We have set out water for them or
we cannot keep them out of the house. No signs of rain. The following lines
have been on my mind for some time.

    Holy Spirit power divine
    Ever dwell with me and mine
    Every evil thought remove
    Fill our souls with light and love.

    Life and peace let us impart
    Let thy grace fill every heart
    That our feet may never stray
    From the straight and narrow way.

    Clothe us with Eternal lives
    All our daughters, sons, and wives
    We ask all to the resign
    Seal us Lord forever thine.

August 29th. Terribly hot and dry. Sky wonderfully blue. No prospect of rain.
In looking over the newspapers I find the U.S. Government is doing their best
to stop the Saints from emigrating to Utah. They accuse all foreign Mormon
emigration of being criminals, whose object in coming to the U.S. is to break
her laws. The corruption of the U.S. Government will soon come to an end. The
sword of justice will soon drop. The government cannot bear to have one Saint
left in the United States.

    The government is trying hard
    To stop the Saints from emigrating
    But when they fight against the Lord
    They find his hand their works abating.

    A few good men with God their friend
    Is sure to prove majority
    And when the powers of earth contend
    Will find themselves the minority.

    Then let them work and falsehood speak
    It soon will turn to their vexation
    Without repentance God hath said
    He would come out and vex the nation.

August 29th, 1879. Started to go to Parowan after the flour arrived there. In
the afternoon of the 30th found the family of my son in law Samuel Orton sick
and in affliction. They had buried one son the day before and that evening
another died and was buried on Sunday the first of September. This is the
fourth child they have lost since the 9th of April when their mother died. All
from the affects of Scarlet fever. I preached to the people on the occasion and
had a good time for the spirit of the Lord was manifest to all. On Monday I
started home with my flour and arrived on Tuesday the 3rd of September. Found
all well.

September 17th. Very hot and dry with no signs of rain. This drought will be at
least one thousand and five hundred dollars damage to me before the year comes
around. The Lord knows what is for the best of his people. I covet not silver
or gold, or the riches and honors of this world, but do verily desire and covet
faith, wisdom, and understanding to know and understand the things of God, and
his will concerning me.

    My God to thee my soul looks up
    Thy grace my thoughts employ
    Thou are my glory, life, and hope,
    And found of every joy.

    When foes combine! And thou are friend
    My victory is won
    Their works of darkness quickly end
    Like night before the sun.

    Thy praise shall ever be thy theme
    Thy cause my heart inspires
    To glorify Thy Holy Name
    Fulfills my chief desires.

October 6, 1879. The first snow on the mountains this fall fell last night with
a little rain in the valley but not enough to bring any water.

October 13th. A little more snow on the mountain last night, but no rain to do
any good in the valleys.

December 5th, 1879. I was taken sick on the 27th or October with a dreadful
cough and a death like weakness pervading my whole system. I have been confined
to my bed and house most of the time since. Not able to do any business
whatever. I have felt a little better for the last few days, but very weak yet.
There has been some rain with a good deal of snow on the mountains, but not
water damming down the stream to haul from Toquerville still.

January 1st, 1880 has come in with much snow and cold weather.

    Yes Seventy and nine has passed away
    And eighty comes rushing in
    Old time sweeps on and cannot stay
    To reprimand the man of sin
    Revealed in Christians who combine
    With fraud, deception, lies and cheat
    To rob the Saints, imprison and fine,
    And their expulsion to complete.

Another Christian Crusade against the Saints is on hand, petitions pouring into
Congress from all sides to enact laws to proscribe the Saints in their rights
of Citizenship by disenfranchising all who believe in Celestial marriage. While
Congress seems determined to put down plural marriage, even to extermination if
it cannot be done without, the motto of Congress and all Christendom at the
present seems to be

    Fines and prisons to wives to keep
    All right with courtesans to sleep.

I think this nation will beat the Antideluvians or Sodomites for seduction,
prostitution, and whoredom. My health is still very poor, not able to do
anything. No water in the streams yet, have to melt snow for water. Fair warm
days with cool night. Snow about six inches, very hard.

    Father hear my constant cry
    For thy love and favor
    Through this year to me draw nigh
    Seal me with thine forever.
    May I through this year have peace
    From all sin Salvation
    And by blessing all increase
    Free from tribulation.

January 7th. Today I received the news of the death of my daughter Margaret (by
my wife Janet). She was the wife of David Frederick Junior. She died in
childbirth on December 19, 1879, aged 29 years and nine months. Born on the
19th of March, 1850. She was a kind, faithful, and affectionate young women.
Her child, a daughter, was still born, at Hillsdale, Iron County, Utah.

### TO MAGGIE

    Go Maggie to thy rest in peace
    And join thy kindred there
    For thou hast found a sweet release
    From every toil and care.

    Thy friends will greet thee there with joy
    Who long have gone before
    Where peace and love without alloy
    Shall reign forever more.

    Or till the resurrection morn
    When Christ again appears
    And all the dead to earth return
    To dwell a thousand years.

    With honor then we all shall meet
    Our daughter, sons, and wives
    Our glory then will be complete
    Crowned with eternal lives.

January 20th. Went down to Silver-Reef to do some business with my brother, and
got the patent for my homestead. Done my business and returned in the evening.
Quite warm weather. Snow all gone from the valley. Some water down North Ash
Creek. My health a little on the mend but feel very weak and lame, feel quite
lonesome, yet feel to offer the following prayer to my Heavenly Father.

    Oh! Father keep me safe from strife
    O'er all my ways preside
    In every though and act of life
    Be thou my daily guide.

    That I may spend my remnant days
    From all confusions free
    And know with joy, in all my ways
    I have been led by thee.

    And when I pass behind the veil
    Let joy thy bosom fill
    That while on earth, I did not fail
    To know and do thy will.

January 28th. Last night there came of heavy snow storm from the north with
high wind which is drifting the snow badly.

February 2nd. For the last four days there has been a terrible wind drifting
all the snow in the roads into heaps and covering them with sand. Terrible
cold. Candlemas Day but not a cloud to be seen.

February 19th. Today is quite warm, but the most of this month (so far) has
been very cold and windy. I think this is the worst winter so far that we have
had since I have lived here. My general health seems to be good, but I am very
weak and not able to do anything, but write a little.

### THE LORD MY GUIDE

    Oh! Lord thou art my hope and guide
    My light by night and day,
    Help me thy council to abide
    And walk the narrow way.

    Clothe me with wisdom, faith and love
    That I may never stray
    Or do what thou dost not approve
    But walk the narrow way.

    Thou art my glory, life and pride,
    My fortress, shield and stay
    My true and everlasting guide
    To walk the narrow way.

March 1st, 1880. Weather unsettled. My health poor, very weak, not able to
work. Today Sister Hanks came over with two small children for me to bless,
which I willingly did.

    God bless the little one with peace
    And keep them safe from sin
    That they in wisdom may increase
    And crowns of glory win.

March 12th. Yesterday was a very fine, warm day, and I sent Joseph and Ezekiel
to Parowan for flour, and last night there came up a storm from the North, and
it has been very stormy with snow and high wind all day. hope the boys will
return safe.

March 15th. The boys returned today about noon having suffered much with cold.

March 19th. Went to Silver Reef to see my brother, but he was gone to St.
George. Done no business and came home.

March 23rd. This is my seventy eighth birthday. In reviewing my past life, I do
not see how I could have bettered it much under the circumstances. My principle
object through life has been to deal justly, love, mercy, and walk humbly with
God, and to build up Zion for which I have labored unceasingly for the last
forty eight years, by preaching the principles of life and salvation to the
people and donation to gather up the poor saints from the Nations.

### PRAYER FOR ZION

    Show mercy unto Zion Lord
    That faith and truth with love divine
    And righteousness may be restored
    That all her children may be thine.

    Give life and health to all thine own
    Let peace and friendship with them blend
    That every virtue may be known
    And wickedness may have an end.

    That all thy saints with one accord
    May unto thee their homage bring
    And thou forever be adored
    As Zions Savior, Lord, and King.

April 6th, 1880. This day completed the fiftieth year since the organization of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. I was baptized into said
Church on the first day of June, 1831, which makes me a member of the church
forty nine years, lacking one month and twenty five days. My age at this date
is seventy eight years and fourteen days. I have raised up three families of
children to manhood and am now raising my fourth consisting of a wife and six
children, two having died. I have no help except two small boys, and it is very
difficult to hire help therefore, I have to labor almost incessantly. The boys
of my other families have all gone for themselves long ago. Some of them ought
to have stopped and worked with their father, which would have been a great
blessing to themselves and their aged father, who could have spent his time in
writing upon the scores of different subjects that are continually crowding in
his mind, but not have to be neglected.

April 25th. Went to Silver Reef to see my brother and heard letters read from
A. F. McDonald of Arizona, and returned the same day.

May 21, 1880. Went down to Silver Reef to see Joseph again in regard to our
mission to the Gila in Arizona, and heard very encouraging letters read from an
R.R. agent there giving a fine description of the country and returned the same
day.

May 24th. Appointed a family meeting at my house today to instruct my family a
little and to baptize my little daughter Almera Woodard Johnson. Who should
have been baptized last summer, but the water all dried up so that there was no
place for baptizing. I gave an invitation for all to come who wished. Quite a
number came to meeting with several other children to be baptized. Brother
Samuel Gould went into the water and baptized them, being five in number, after
which we had meeting and confirmed them. Brother Gould gave the children very
good and timely council. I then spoke to all and gave them good instruction. We
had a good time.

May 30th. Had another meeting at my house and I baptized Ebenezer W. McDougie
and his wife, also Joseph Sylvester. After baptizing we had a meeting and
confirmed them, there was quite a congregation present. I spoke to them upon
many subjects of Christian duty after which Brother Guild gave them a short
lecture.

July 18, 1880. Today we had a small shower of rain which is the first which
could be called rain this summer. The water in the streams is nearly dried up.
A very small stream comes down from the mountains, but once in a day with which
we keep our Cisterns filled, there is none for irrigating purposes. All
vegetation is being dried up. My health is very good for a man of my age for
which I am very greatful to my Heavenly Father for this and every other
blessing bestowed upon me.

    While many years have come and gone
    And I have learned by day and night
    His will of me, to do, when know
    For He has done, and will do right.

(COPYISTS NOTE: From this book, pages are gone from page 100 to 107, and the
next entry in this copy is picked up as shown in the middle of a paragraph)

That the Johnson family celebrate this day with prayers and Thanksgiving one
year from this time at Johnson. Sang We thank Thee O God for a Prophet.
Benediction by William Johnson Jr.

August 10, 1881. For the last month the weather has been very hot and dry, but
little rain. Hot weather and old age makes me weak that I am unable to labor or
move about but little.

    Old age can nothing find to cure it
    And those who share it, must endure it.

The following lines poetry my present feelings.

    I am an Ephiramite indeed
    In whom no guile is found
    And Zions cause too: love and plead
    When foes are prowling round.

    Do I with firmness bear the cross
    And wave its banner high
    And have no fear of shame or loss
    When death looks sure and nigh.

    Yes Father: thou has known me well
    Through all the days of yore
    And knowest that my labors tell
    Thy Kingdom to restore.

    That I in truth have kept thy laws
    And labored with my might
    To forwards Zions hold cause
    With pleasure and delight.

September 5th. Attended the quarterly conference at Kanab. Brothers McAllister
and Blake occupied the first day upon very interesting subjects, on the second
day I spoke on my first acquaintance with Joseph Smith, this first calling and
organization of the different quorums of the church, the building and
dedication of the Temple at Kirtland, the persecution that followed, etc. We
had a very interesting time.

October 17th. Today myself and wife Janet and son Ezekiel started to go to
Bellevue. Went to Kanab and stopped for the night.

October 18th. Today my son Nephi joined me and we went to Cedar Ridge and
camped for the night.

October 19th. Went to Virgin City, and stopped all night with my daughter
Sariah.

October 20th. Went to Silver Reef, took dinner with my brother Joseph E. and
stopped all night. Went to Bellevue next day, accompanied by Andrew Gregerson
and stopped with Brother James Sylvester. Settled with Gregerson who paid me
three hundred dollars towards what was still due on the farm. I took his note
for the balance and gave him a deed.

April 22nd. Started for home. Stopped all night to Toquerville and made a
preemption claim on 160 acres of land. Next morning went to Virgin City and
preached to the people being Sunday. Then went to the Gould or Workman place
and stopped for the night and arrived home on the 25th.

December 25th, 1881. So few people at Johnson this Christmas. There was no
gathering of any kind and nothing done to celebrate the day.

January 1, 1882. Our new year came on Sunday. Saturday evening we had a little
gathering of young folks at D. Johnsons who got up a few plays with speeches,
recitations, singing. We then had pies and cakes passed around, and all seemed
to have quite an enjoyable time.

January 13th. My health is very good for a man of my age, for which I feel
thankful to my Heavenly Father, and also for the blessing of His Holy Spirit
continually abiding with me day and night, speaking peace to my heart.

    I want my offspring all to know
    That while this earth my feet hath trod
    I've tried by works, my faith to show
    And sought to live with God.

    Oh! may they never come behind
    Their father's love for Zion's cause
    But in their labors be combine
    To live by, and sustain her laws.

January 26th. When I look abroad upon this Christian Nation of the United
States, and see the abominations that will soon make them desolate practiced
amongst them, seductions, prostitutions, and whoredoms, and see their
determined warfare against the Saints of Most High to push them to the wall, or
rob them of every constitutional right, at Citizens of the United States, my
soul cries out:

    Father, let the heavens rend
    And thy Son to earth descend
    Let Him quickly come again
    With thy Saints to live and reign.

    May old Satan soon be bound
    And on earth no more be found
    Let his hosts in prison wail
    While o'er them thy Saints prevail.

    May earth be by fire baptize
    For the Saints be organized
    While the wicked all are slain
    And no curse on it remain.

February 1st. Ever since I have embraced the fullness of the Gospel, I have
been faithful to fill every mission to which I have been called, and have
always preached the Gospel to all people when I have had the opportunity, and
never was asked to speak on the subject and refused, and have always responded
when asked for donations to gather the poor. And have strove to live by the
words of life that have come from the mouth of God. My feeling today are
represented in the following lines.

    Like deers upon the mountains high
    Where living waters never flow
    Who oft must drink or faint and die
    With thirst, while o'er the wilds they go
    Or on the burning plain.

    So, thirsty my soul to know my God
    To make his glory all my theme
    And walk the path that Enoch trod
    And drink from lifes eternal stream
    And never thirst again

February 9th. Oh! thou God of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
Moses and Joshua and all the Saints of the old, thou art this day my God and my
friend, as thou was their God and friend when they made this earth their
dwelling place. And I love thee with all my heart and soul with Thy Son Jesus
Christ. While I am filled with the light of thy holy Spirit I behold the trees
of the field soon to clap their hands in praise to God. And I feel to cry aloud
and shout Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, to God and the lamb, forever and ever, and
ever, Amen, Amen, and Amen. Isaiah 55 Chapter and 12th verse.

    Soon every thing that lives on earth
    Though simple in their ways
    In peace and love and sacred mirth
    Shall sound Jehovah's praise.

February 14, 1882. My heart is often pained with sorrow, while tears run down
my cheek by day and wet my couch by night, from which I cannot refrain. Could I
have filled the mission given me by my Heavenly Father and President Taylor, to
colonize my family and those that wished to join me somewhere in Arizona or New
Mexico, and organize them in the holy order of the sons of Joel, that they may
be safe when the overflowing scourge of God shall pass through the earth. Then
my heart would have been filled with joy, and my spirit buoyant with hope for
their safety and salvations. But my sons have scattered to the four winds,
which causes my present grief. I also find that the spirit of disobedience
implanted by Satan in the breast of Mother Eve has been transmitted to her
daughters more or less to the present day. The words of God to Eve (Gen 3:16)
"Thy husband shall rule over thee". And the words of Paul "Wives submit
yourselves to you own husbands as unto the Lord". Are we not very well relished
by some of her daughters in this age. I find within my own doors there is a
lack of that obedience union and love that should be manifest among the sons
and daughters of Zion which adds greatly to my grief and sorrow. So confident
are most of the women of this age that God made a mistake in giving that rule
to Adam, but meant to give it to Eve, that they contend not only for the rule
of their husband, but to become Judges, Governors, Presidents, and rulers of
Nations. But God will set all things right in its time.

### ADVERSE WIND

    Blow high and let thy storm increase
    O wind though cold thou art
    Thou canst not change the inward peace
    The summer of my heart.

    Send thy cold sleet with hail and snow
    And make the forests nod,
    My breast still feels the sunshine glow
    That ripens fruit of God.

    I'll lift my head though sorrows come,
    Like clouds to fill the sky
    I know for me the harvest home
    The vintage hour is nigh.

    When fruit is ripe upon the vine,
    Thus owned of God and blessed
    Eternal life shall be the wine
    That shall from it be pressed.

March 10th, 1882. I showed 130 of my pamphlets containing my testimony of the
truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed by the Lord to Joseph Smith,
Jr. To the senate and Legislative assembly of Congress to obtain special
legislation to disenfranchise the Saints in Utah, and rob them of all their
rights as American Citizens. But their greatest object is to drive them from
Utah and rob them all of their possessions and property as they have before
been robbed in Missouri and Illinois.

March 23, 1882. This day completes the eightieth yea of my age and a few of my
friends came together at my house to celebrate the day. There were present my
son Nephi Johnson and family, my brother William D. Johnson and family, his son
Bishop W. D. Johnson,. Jr., and family with William Law and family, and many
others. I consider this one of the happiest days of my life, a day I never
expected to see when afflicted with long protracted sickness and hunter at
other times by scores of wicked mobbers, some with drawn revolvers and nutcher
knoves, but God hath preserved my life from disease and the power of wicked men
until have the glorious opportunity of celebration of my eightieth birthday.

I received the gospel and was baptized June 1st, 1831, and have preached the
same to all people where ever my lot has been cast, on mission, in public
congregations, by the way side, by camp fires, and in all gatherings where
opportunity has offered. Had all people that I have warned been as faithful to
warn others as I had and they kept up the warnings the whole world would have
been warned before now. I gave the people a lecture on various subjects which
was interesting to all. Took lunch at 12 o'clock, and in the evening came
together for recreations. All had a good time.

    Yes, eighty years have past and gone
    Since I was giv'n on earth a place
    Yet ever since life's early dawn
    I've sought my Saviors love and grace.

    And though through life I've made no show
    Yet when my days on earth shall end
    I wish all man to feel and know
    That God has always been my friend.

    For I have lived my holy word
    From him, and sought to love and please
    All those on whom he has conferred
    The gospel power and priesthood keys.

June 1st, 1882. This day completes the fifty first year since I was baptized
unto the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, a few of my friends and
relatives came together to celebrate the day. I read the minutes of our last
meeting and related a few things that occurred in my childhood. Could remember
the first application of the steam as a motive power when Fulton ran his first
stream boat from New York to Albany. Could remember many of the incidents of
the War of 1812 with Great Britain, heard the cannon of some battles, the
battle of New Orleans took place two months after the treaty of peace. I saw
the first steam boat that ran down the Ohio River, being the second one ever
built. Saw the first one that ran on Lake Erie. Was acquainted with many of the
soldiers of the Revolutionary war and shook hands with some of the Generals,
Lafayette among the rest, had voted for most of the Presidents since
Washington, etc. After which William D. Johnson, James Glover, and James F.
Johnson made some remarks appropriate for the occasion.

Joel Hills Johnson died September 24,1882, in Johnson, Kane County, Utah at the
age of 80 years, six months and 1 day.

This Journal transcribed by Bertha McGee (Joel's great grandaughter), her
daughter Linda, and Linda's husband Chuck Harrington. The resulting text was
marked up using HTML for web presentation by Bertha's son Scott.  If you have
found errors in this manuscript, please understand of the conditions that we
went through. Please let us know and we will gladly research and fix them.
Thanks, Bertha, Linda, Chuck, and Scott.

## Johnson, Joel Hills

    Johnson, Joel Hills (Male)\[i\]
    Birth: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Date: March 23, 1802 Place: Grafton, Worcester, MA, USA
    Parents: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Father: Johnson, Ezekiel Mother: Hills, Julia
    Death: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Date: September 24, 1882 Place: Johnson, Kane, UT, USA 
    Alternate Date: September 28, 1882\[ii\] Alternate Place: near Johnson, Kane, UT, USA 
    Buried: Johnson, Kane, UT, USA\[iii\]
    Marriage Information: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Spouse: Johnson, Anna Pixley Date: May 2, 1826 
    Place: Pomfret, Chautauqua, NY, USA
    Children: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male)\[iv\]
    Name: Birthdate: Place:
    1. Johnson, Juliana October 2, 1827 Pomfret, Chautauqua, NY, USA
    2. Johnson, Sixtus Ellis October 8, 1829 Pomfret, Chautauqua, NY, USA
    3. Johnson, Sariah Anna February 18, 1832 Amherst, Lorraine, OH, USA
    4. Johnson, Nephi December 12, 1833 Kirtland, Geauga, OH, USA
    5. Johnson, Susan Ellen July 11, 1836 Kirtland, Geauga, OH, USA
    6. Johnson, Seth March 6, 1839 Carthage, Hancock, IL, USA
    Marriage Number 2 Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Spouse: Bryant, Susan Date: October 20, 1840\[v\] 
    Place: Nauvoo, Hancock, IL, USA
    Marriage 2 Children:\[vi\]
    Name: Birthdate: Place:
    1. Johnson, Mary Marie August 2, 1841 Ramus, IL, USA
    2. Johnson, Emily November 20, 1842 Ramus, IL, USA
    3. Johnson, Joel H. June 23, 1844 Ramus, IL, USA
    4. Johnson, Julia Ann February 20, 1847 French Creek, Knox, IL, USA
    5. Johnson, David William February 12, 1849 Mill Creek, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    6. Johnson, Mary Susan (twin) November 29, 1850 Cottonwood, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    7. Johnson, Joel Hills (twin) November 29, 1850 Cottonwood, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    8. Johnson, Almon Babbitt February 21, 1855 Fort Johnson, Iron, UT, USA
    Marriage Number 3 Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Spouse: Bascom, Lucinda Alsine
    Marriage 3 Children:\[vii\]
    Name: Birthdate: Place:
    1. Johnson, Joel Andrew July 22, 1847 Danville, Ogle, IL, USA
    Marriage Number 4 Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Spouse: Fife, Janet \[viii\]
    Marriage 4 Children:\[ix\]
    Name: Birthdate: Place:
    1. Johnson, Janet Maurstia December 17, 1848 Mill Creek, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    2. Birth-Date: March 19, 1850 Mill Creek, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    3. Johnson, James Fife May 25, 1852 Johnson Fort, Iron, UT, USA
    4. Johnson, Joseph Elmer 1855 Cedar City, Iron, UT, USA
    5. Johnson, Hyrum 1857 Cedar City, Iron, UT, USA
    Marriage Number 5 Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Spouse: Threlkeld, Margaret \[x\] 
    Date: October 11, 1860\[xi\] Place: Salt Lake City, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    Marriage 5 Children:\[xii\]
    Name: Birthdate: Place:
    1. Johnson, Esther Ellis December 23, 1861 Virgin, Washington, UT, USA
    2. Johnson, Mary Elizabeth August 17, 1864 Virgin, Washington, UT, USA
    3. Johnson, Joseph Hills December 1, 1866 Virgin, Washington, UT, USA
    4. Birth-Date: April 16, 1869 Belvieu, Washington, UT, USA
    5. Birth-Date: October 25, 1871 Belvieu, Washington, UT, USA
    6. Johnson, Jeremiah April 9, 1874 Belvieu, Washington, UT, USA
    7. Johnson, Margaret Hannah April 6, 1876 Belvieu, Washington, UT, USA
    8. Johnson, Amos Partridge March 26, 1878 Belvieu, Washington, UT, USA
    9. Johnson, John Henry January 7, 1881 Johnson, Kane, UT, USA
    Church Ordinance Data: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Baptism\[xiii\] Date: June 1, 1831 Ordained Elder\[xiv\] Date: September 20, 1831 Ordained High Priest\[xv\] Date: July 15, 1840 Officiator: Hyrum Smith
    Temple Ordinance Data: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Endowment\[xvi\] Date: December 31, 1845 Temple: Nauvoo, Hancock, IL, USA Sealed to Parents\[xvii\] Date: April 1, 1926 Sealed to Spouse Number 1\[xviii\] Date: February 3, 1846 Temple: Nauvoo, Hancock, IL, USA Sealed to Spouse Number 2\[xix\] Date: March 19, 1879 Sealed to Spouse Number 3\[xx\] Date: February 3, 1846 Temple: Nauvoo, Hancock, IL, USA Sealed to Spouse Number 4\[xxi\] Date: May 4, 1861 Sealed to Spouse Number 5\[xxii\] Date: October 11, 1860
    Places of Residence: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Amhurst, Loraine, OH, USA Knox, IL, USA Kirtland, Geauga, OH, USA Ramus, IL, USA; 1848 Kane, UT, USA; 1870 Utah, UT, USA; 1850\[xxiii\]
    Vocations: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male) Mill at Carthage Farmer; 1850; 1870 Stockraiser\[xxiv\]
    Comments: Johnson, Joel Hills (Male)In 1850, Joel had a household of 11, a real wealth of $800, and no personal wealth.In 1870, Joel had a household of 4, a real wealth of $1000, and a personal wealth of $500. \[xxv\] Comments: #21. Joel went to Kentucky with his uncle, 1813. To Pomfret, New York, 1815. Bought sawmill and built house, 1823. Marriage, 1826. Inventor. ("In the year of 1829 I invented and patented the shingle cutter machine now used for making or cutting shingles throughout the United States and Canada.") Move to Amherst, Ohio, 1830. Conversion to Mormonism, 1831. Mission to relatives in New York. To Kirtland, 1832. ("President Smith counseled me to move to Kirtland and buy out certain obnoxious individuals.") \[xxvi\] Comments: #31. Joel came to Utah, October 19, 1848 in the Willard Richards company. Joel was a missionary to Iowa and Nebraska 1857-60; bishop; high councilor; patriarch. Member city council; chaplain of territorial legislature at Fillmore. Farmer and Stockraiser. Was present at the dedication of the Kirtland temple. Died September 24, 1882, Johnson, Utah. \[xxvii\] Comments: #41. Joel labored as a missionary in Ohio and New York. He came to Utah in 1848. He was baptized June 1, 1831, ordained an Elder the following September 20th and appointed to preside over the Amherst Branch of the Church. He was called on a mission to the State of New York, in January 1832. Elder Johnson arrived with his family in Salt Lake City, Utah, October 9, 1848, and died September 24, 1882, at Johnson, Kane County, Utah. \[xxviii\] Comments: #51. Joel presided over branch in Amherst, Ohio. He was president of the Crooked Creek branch and Stake President there. He was President of the Ramus, Illinois Stake also. He organized Kirtland Camp. \[xxix\] Comments: #61. Joel was a composer of songs and hymns. He owned negroes. He was a chaplain of the House of Representatives. He was a justice of the peace and a legislator. \[xxx\]
    \[i\]Nauvoo Temple Endowment Register 1845-46A Profile of ...Camp, 1830-39. Backman, Jr., Milton V.Mormon Manuscripts to 1846. Andrus, Hyrum. 1977Temple Index BureauFamily Group Sheet-SelfFar West Record, by Don CannonPage: 271A Sketch of the Life of Joel H. Johnson(microfilm-BYU Library)Index to the Kirtland High Council Minute BookPage: 193, 196Kirtland High Council Minute Book ListPage: 3Utah Federal Census; Year: 1851, 1870Mormons and Their Neighbors. Wiggins, MarvinA History of Kane CountyPage: 425, 517LDS Biographical Encyclopedia. Jenson, Andrew. 1951Volume: 4 Page: 444Our Pioneer Heritage. Carter, Kate. 1958Volume: 15 Page: 223Volume: 4, 5, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17Stories of our Mormon Hymns.Page: 71Family Group Sheet-FatherNauvoo Social History Project. Smith, JamesJournal History of the ChurchDecember 31, 1831, 1832, 1833; April 16, 1835A Voice From the Mountains; Life and Works of JoelHills JohnsonDiary of Joel Hils JohnsonHeart Throbs of the West. Carter, KateVolume: 3:27; 1:149Treasures of Pioneer History. Carter, Kate. 1952Pioneers and Prominent Men of Utah. Esshom, Frank. 1913Page: 970
    \[ii\]Mormon Manuscripts to 1846. Andrus, Hyrum. 1977Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[iii\]Temple Index BureauFamily Group Sheet-SelfFamily Group Sheet-Father
    \[iv\]Family Group Sheet-SelfChildren's-Data:Child-Number: 1Johnson, JulianaBirth-Date: October 2, 1827Birth-Place: Pomfret, Chautauqua, NY, USA
    \[v\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[vi\]Family Group Sheet-SelfChildren's-Data:Child-Number: 1Johnson, Mary MarieBirth-Date: August 2, 1841Birth-Place: Ramus, IL, USA
    \[vii\]Family Group Sheet-SelfChildren's-Data:Child-Number: 1Johnson, Joel AndrewBirth-Date: July 22, 1847Birth-Place: Danville, Ogle, IL, USA
    \[viii\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[ix\]Family Group Sheet-SelgChildren's-Data:Child-Number: 2Johnson, Janet MaurstiaBirth-Date: December 17, 1848Birth-Place: Mill Creek, Salt Lake, UT, USA
    \[x\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xi\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xii\]Family Group Sheet-SelhChildren's-Data:Child-Number: 6Johnson, Esther EllisBirth-Date: December 23, 1861Birth-Place: Virgin, Washington, UT, USA
    \[xiii\]Temple Index BureauFamily Group Sheet-SelfFamily Group Sheet-Father
    \[xiv\]Far West RecordPage: 271Journal History of the Church
    \[xv\]Mormons and Their Neighbors. Wiggins, MarvinJournal History of the Church
    \[xvi\]Nauvoo Temple Endowment Register 1845-46Family Group Sheet-FatherFamily Group Sheet-Self
    \[xvii\]Temple Index Bureau
    \[xviii\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xix\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xx\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xxi\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xxii\]Family Group Sheet-Self
    \[xxiii\]Utah Federal Census; Year: 1851, 1870Mormon Manuscripts to 1846. Andrus, Hyrum. 1977Far West RecordPage: 271
    \[xxiv\]Utah Federal Census; Year: 1851, 1870Mormon Manuscripts to 1846. Andrus, Hyrum. 1977Pioneers and Prominent Men of Utah. Esshom, Frank. 1913Page: 970
    \[xxv\]Utah Federal Census; Year: 1851, 1870
    \[xxvi\]Mormon Manuscripts to 1846. Andrus, Hyrum. 1977
    \[xxvii\]Pioneers and Prominent Men of Utah. Esshom, Frank. 1913Page: 970
    \[xxviii\]Journal History of the Church
    \[xxix\]Journal History of the Church
    \[xxx\]Our Pioneer Heritage. Carter, Kate. 1958

## Selections from early L.D.S. Records

Joel Hills Johnson (1802)

### SELECTIONS FROM EARLY LATTER-DAY SAINT RECORDS

    Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Auto (1977)285
    JOHNSON, JOEL HILLS, 1802-1882
    Autobiography (1802-1868)

Typescript. 6 pp. HDC \[LDS Church Archives\] (Ms d 2050, 19, 2, #l); UHi \[Ut St
Hist Soc\] (Man A 26-2); LC \[Library of Congress\]; BYU \[Lee Library\] (M270.1
J633); USU \[Merrill Libr, Ut State\]

Birth in Massachusetts, 1802. To Kentucky with uncle, 1813. To Pomfret, New
York, 1815. Bought sawmill and built house, 1823. Marriage, 1826. Inventor.
("In the year of 1829 I invented and patented the shingle cutter machine now
used for making or cutting shingles throughout the United States and Canada.")
Move to Amherst, Ohio, 1830. Conversion to Mormonism, 1831. Mission to
relatives in New York. To Kirtland, 1832. ("President Smith counseled me to
move to Kirtland and buy out certain obnoxious individuals, which I did.")
Built sawmill to assist in construction of temple. Mission in Ohio, 1835.
Dedication of Kirtland Temple, 1837.

With Kirtland Camp to Illinois, 1838. Stopped at Springfield, led branch. To
Carthage ("The Lord showed me by revelation"), led branch, 1839. Ordained stake
president, 1840. Death of wife and remarriage, 1840. Stake disorganized ("on
account of a secret organized band of false brethren, that had crept in amongst
us.") Marriage to plural wife, 1845. From Nauvoo to Knox County ("where I had
claim on an eighty acre soldier right of land"), 1846. Trek west to Utah, 1847.

Bishop of Mill Creek Ward, justice of peace. Member of legislature, 1849-50.
Called to help form settlement at Parowan, 1850. Mission to Iowa and Nebraska,
1857-60. Another marriage, 1860. Move to Dixie, 1861; moved to North Creek,
then to Virgin City, finally to Bellevue in 1868.

Testimony of mission of Joseph Smith. Wrote about 1,000 hymns, mostly
unpublished.

    Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Auto (1977)286
    JOHNSON, JOEL HILLS, 1802-1882
    Diary (1860-1882)

Holograph. 114 pp. 30.2 cm. HDC \[LDS Church Archives\] (Ms d 1546)

Typescript. 99 pp. HDC \[LDS Church Archives\] (Ms d 1546); UHi \[Ut St Hist Soc\]
(Man A26-2); LC \[Library of Congress\]; BYU \[Lee Library\] (J270.1J633)

Farm work. Poor health. Wrote letters and poetry. Some discouragement. Blames
"his Satanic Majesty." Sense that life is drawing to a close, 1860. References
to lies about himself. Work in mill. Much puttering around the house. Has a
store. Rowdies demand liquor, one drawing a knife. ("I caught hold of a Shovel
which lay near at hand and drew it up and told him if he came any nearer I
should knock him down with it.") Lonesome, depressed. Printing shop
established. Issued Huntsman's Echo. Fled into hiding on Grand Island when
heard that he would be arrested, possibly for selling whiskey to Indians
(denied) or for having Margaret for housekeeper. Great sense of persecution.
Forgives enemies, does not wish revenge. Worked on Huntsman's Echo, ("a paper
published at this place by my Brother.") Sold goods to emigrants. Trip to Omaha
to buy outfit. Encountered "the first company of handcarts." Author's brother,
William Johnson, had store in Florence. Set out for Utah, August. Arrival in
Salt Lake, 5 October 1860. On to Iron County, where found farm and property in
bad shape. Repaired house.

Departure for the Virgin River, 17 December. Explored area, bought house and
lot from son. Return to Parowan. Hard work, bad weather, poor health. Copied
journal from "manuscripts." Jealousy among the women ("which is apt to be the
case when a new one comes into a family.") Summary of activities in early 1861:
established house, farm, and molasses mill in Virgin City. Notes arrival of
"missionary families." Called by Erastus Snow to build sawmill on North Creek.
Very sketchy, 1862-64. Indian trouble, 1865. Hard words from Erastus Snow ("he
censured me very highly and said things that I donât feel to mention")
led author to leave North Creek and move to Virgin City, 1866. Floods, late
1867. Move to South Ash Creek near Toquerville, 1868. Kirtland Camp anniversary
celebration, 1868.

Trip to Salt Lake, 1870. Temple work. Second anointings. Family meeting at St.
George, December 1870. Ordained patriarch. Family stock ranch established,
failed. Sawmill on Sevier River. Much traveling from place to place. Survey for
settlement at Hillsdale. Work on farm at Bellevue, 1873. Explains lack of
education of children. Conference at St. George; main message was to leave
Pioche alone. Poem: "To My Wives," one stanza for each. Poetry becomes quite
frequent. Baptized son at age eight, 1874; predicts that "he is to become a
printer and publisher not only of my Books but many others brought forth by the
Saints." Entries more infrequent. Family organized into "the Sons of Joel,"
1875. Several references to expectation of imminent "last days." Reference to
"my Seventy Sixth Birth day Review, which is recorded in another Book."

Call to gather up his family and colonize them in Arizona, 1879. Death of
little son, Jeremiah. This call later revoked by Brother Snow, "who decided
that I had pioneered enough and was to old to make a new Settlement in a new
country." Terrible drought. Much preaching. Denounced U.S. Government's
prosecution of polygamists. ("I think this Nation will beat the antediluvians
or Sodomites for Seduction prostitution and Whoredom.") Deplored disobedience
of family members. Sent pamphlets to Congress in Washington.

A few pages missing for 1881. Holograph in very poor condition.

    Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Auto (1977)287
    JOHNSON, JOEL HILLS, 1802-1882
    Journal excerpts (l802-1882)

EXCERPTS FROM A JOURNAL OR SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF JOEL HILLS JOHNSON (BROTHER TO
BENJAMIN F. JOHNSON). (n.d., n.p. \[Ogden Kraut\] ). 34 pp. HDC \[LDS Church
Archives\]

Born in Grafton, Massachusetts, 1802. Poetry. Religious child. Became Free-Will
Baptist, c. 1825. Married, 1826. Purchased farm. Invented shingle machine,
1829. Moved to Amherst, Ohio, 1830. Sawmill. Mormons at Kirtland. Converted.
Baptized, June 1831. Ordained elder. Moved to Kirtland. Mission in Ohio, 1835.
Temple. Endowments, 1836. Member, second Quorum of Seventy. At Carthage,
Illinois, 1839. Moved to Crooked Creek, 1840. President of Crooked Creek Stake.
Death of wife. Moved to Ramus, 1840. Secret combination of Saints to rob and
plunder. Dissension. Stake disorganized, 1841. Martyrdom of Smiths, 1844.
Married Janet Fife, 1845. Went to Knox County. Crossed plains, 1848. Settled in
Mill Creek Ward. Justice of peace. Bishop. Member of Deseret's house of
representatives, 1849. Called to Little Salt Lake Valley, 1850. Member of
Parowan City Council, 1851. Wrote hymns. Walker War. Reformation, 1856. Trip
east to investigate death of brother-in-law, Almon W. Babbitt, 1857. Apostates
at Genoa \[Nebraska?\]. Returned to Utah, 1860. Married Margaret Threkold, 1860.
Other wives. Moved to Virgin City. President of Mt. Dell Branch, 1865. Second
anointings, 1870. Millennialism, 1873. Family organized as "Sons of Joel,"
1875. Called to go to Arizona and live in United Order, 1879. Unable to fulfill
mission. Wrote pamphlet testifying of truth of gospel as revealed to Joseph
Smith.

    Davis Bitton, Guide to Mormon Diaries and Auto (1977)288
    JOHNSON, JOEL HILLS, 1802-1882
    Journal (1802-1871)

Holograph. 219 pp. 34.0cm. HDC \[LDS Church Archives\] (Msd 1546)

Holograph. 285 pp. 22.7 cm. HDC \[LDS Church Archives\] (Msd 1546)

Typescript.127 pp. BYU \[Lee Library\] (M270.1 J633)

The volume in folder 5 is titled "A Journal or Sketch of the Life of Joel Hills
Johnson" as is the one in folder 1. The former volume runs from 1802 to
December 1859. The latter goes to 1871. It would appear that the latter volume
is a copy of the former, which was then extended to cover the dozen years that
had elapsed since the original journal was written. Both are retrospective to
the mid 1850s. From then there are fairly regular entries until c. 1861. Then
there is a summary of the decade 1861-71 which appears to be retrospective
although there are some dated entries. The typescript extends from 1802 to c.
1858 and may be taken from one of the holographs here described. It is a
retyping of a Federal Writers' Project typescript.

    Mormon Manuscripts to 1846: Guide to Lee Library, BYU
    JOHNSON, JOEL HILLS (1802-1882).
    Papers. Typescript and photocopy of typescript. 2 items.

Born at Grafton, Massachusetts, son of Ezekiel Johnson and Julia Hills. His
journal, 1802-1858, includes the following: Early life; conversion and
appointment to preside over a branch at Amherst, Ohio, where he resided;
missionary labors in New York State; comments on the Kirtland Temple and
experiences therein; organizing the Kirtland Camp; departure from the Camp at
Springfield, Illinois; missionary labors in that vicinity; removal to Commerce,
Illinois; establishment of a mill in the Carthage, Illinois area; president of
the Crooked Creek Branch which later became a stake with him as president;
conflicts within the stake prior to its disbandment; mob actions against him
before moving west.

His autobiographic sketch adds family background and experiences in Knox
County, Illinois. (The autobiography included in entry HESS, MARGARET STEED.)

    Mormon Manuscripts to 1846: Guide to Lee Library, BYU
    JOHNSON, JOEL HILLS (1802-1882) and ANNIE PIXLEY JOHNSON (1800-1840).
    Biography. Microfilm of typescript, positive, partial reel. 6 pp.

Joel Hills Johnson, son of Ezekiel Johnson and Julia Hills, was born in
Grafton, Worcester County, Massachusetts. His wife, Annie Pixley Johnson,
daughter of Timothy Johnson and Dennis Welch, was born in Canaan, New
Hampshire. Marriage and family life; conversion in 1831; activities at
Kirtland, Ohio; missionary labors in Ohio; missionary experiences in Illinois;
his call as president of an Illinois stake; exodus west.

    Seventies Ordained Before 1850
    Johnson, Joel H.
    Source: 70, 2 Qrm, Apr 1836, \[Kirtland\] Broadside

    Harvey Black, comp, Early Seventies
    JOHNSTON \[JOHNSON\], JOEL HILLS
    Birth: MA 1802
    Death: UT 1882
    Parents: Johnson, Ezekiel
    Wives (Number of Children): Johnson, Anna Pixley (6)
    Bryant, Susan (8)
    Bascom, Lucinda Alsina (1)
    ___, ___ (5)
    ___, ___ (9)
    Ordination: 1836
    Quorum: Q2
    Early Civil Data: Kirtland, Ramus IL
    Early Church Data: Org. Kirtland Camp
    Presided Ramus Stake
    High Priest 1840
    Endowed Nauvoo Temple 12/31/45 (High Priest)
    Post-Nauvoo Civil Data: Justice of Peace
    Legislator
    Farmer-Stockman
    Composed Songs
    Kane UT
    Post-Nauvoo Church Data: Bishop
    Sources: Susan Black, Early LDS Members Rec 25: Q2

Autobiographies of High Priests, Nauvoo 9th Ward, LDS Church Archives

I \[Joseph Holbrook\] left Far West on the 20 Jan 1839 for Illinois. I was chosen
a First Counselor to President Joel H. Johnson in the stake in Macedonia and
ordained under the hand of President Hyrum Smith, Aug or Sep 1840. I removed to
Nauvoo 6 Jul 1842, started for the Black River Pinery 24 May 1843, in company
of President George Miller and others. Ordained High Priest in the Quorum in
Nauvoo 7 Jan 1844 under the hands of Samuel Bent, V. Fulmin of the High
Council, at the April Conference 1844. Was appointed and sent on a mission to
Kentucky by the order of the Twelve to hold forth the reviews and policy of
government by Joseph Smith.

    High Priests of Nauvoo and early Salt Lake
    Johnson, Joel
    Birth: 23 Mar 1802; Grafton, Worchester County, Massachusetts
    Parents: Ezekiel and Julie
    Ordained High Priest: 15 July 1840 in Ramus, Hancock County, Illinois by Hyrum Smith
    Enrolled in H. P. Quorum, SLC: 23 Apr 1848
    Source: High Priest Qrm Rec, organized 25 Apr 1848, SLC, Utah, LDS Arc.

    High Priests of Nauvoo and early Salt Lake
    Johnson \[Johnston\], Joel H. \[Hills\]
    Received into High Priest Quorum: 8 Apr 1841
    Source: High Priest Rec, Qrm Organized at Nauvoo, 1840, LDS Arc.

    1842 Tax Assessors Record, Personal
    Property, Hancock County, Pg. 174
    Joel H. Johnson \[Hibbard Block 6-3\]
    Value of Cattle: $20
    Value of Clocks: $5
    Stock in Trade: $100
    Other Property: $50
    Total Personal Property, Hancock County, 1842 Tax Record: $175

    Pioneers and Prominent Men of Utah, pg.161 Joel H. Johnson
    to Utah Oct. 19, 1848, Franklin D. Richards
    Company. Farmer and Stock raiser

    Pioneers and Prominent Men of Utah, p.970
    JOHNSON, JOEL H. (son of Ezekiel Johnson and Julia Hill). Born March 23, 1802, Grafton, Mass. Came to Utah Oct. 19, 1848, Willard Richards company.

Married Annie P. Johnson Nov. 2, 1826, at Pomfort, N.Y. (daughter of Timothy
Johnson and Dimmis Welch, of Pomfret, N.Y., pioneers 1848, Willard Richards
company). She was born Aug. 7, 1800. Their children: Sixtus E.; Sariah; Nephi
b. Dec. 12, 1833, m. Mandana R. Merrill; Susan T.; Seth b. March 6, 1839, m.
Lydia Ann Smith.

Missionary to Iowa and Nebraska 1857-60; bishop; high councilor; patriarch.
Member city council; chaplain of territorial legislature at Fillmore. Farmer
and stock raiser. Was present at the dedication of the Kirtland temple. Died
Sept. 24, 1882, Johnson, Utah.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 1, p.11

When the missionaries were called home on account of Johnston army troubles,
Alburn Allen returned to Salt Lake Valley with a number of the Saints. Others
had already left the place for the mountains. For a short time after that, Joel
Johnson, and still later, William Poppleton, one of the original settlers of
Genoa, was appointed to preside over the settlement \[Genoa, Nance County,
Nebraska\]. The latter took charge until the place was entirely abandoned by
Latter-day Saints. During the life of the settlement as a Mormon town, meetings
were held regularly on Sundays and Thursday nights and the settlement boasted
of a good choir.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 6, p.462

Janet Mauretta Johnson Smith first saw the light of day in Salt Lake City on
December 17, 1848, just six weeks after her father and mother, Joel Hills
Johnson and Janet Fife, arrived in the valley. In 1850 Mr. Johnson was called
by the Church authorities to help build up the southern settlements, hence they
first settled in Parowan, Iron County, and later at Johnson Springs where Janet
spent many happy childhood days in the old fort. As the family always lived on
the frontier she did well if she received three of four months schooling. When
Janet was eight years old she was baptized a member of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her wedding dress, which was dyed gray, was made
of wool from her father's sheep.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 9, p.136-137

Johnson's Fort was built in the low valley between Cedar Fort (Cedar City) and
Parowan as a protective stockade for the cattle from both settlements. To this
spot with its generous spring, had ventured pioneer Joel Hills Johnson in the
spring of 1851. He had been called to the Iron Mission, and upon exploring the
area surrounding the new community of Parowan, had reached the green, grassy
meadows about twelve miles to the south. Feeling that this would be an ideal
spot for a farm, he stretched out his arms and announced to his companions,
"Mine, all mine!" It is presumed that this early claim to the land resulted in
the area being called "Johnson's Spring."

Later in the same year, George A. Smith, stalwart leader of the Iron Mission,
sent Mr. Johnson and his family to Johnson's Spring to build the stockade. Soon
other families came---Laban Morrell, James and William Dalley and their
families, Thomas P. Smith and James W. Bay, and they built the fort that for
many years was known as "Johnson's Fort." An area ten rods square was laid out,
and the adobes were made of the heavy clay that surrounded the place. The
nine-foot-high walls were two and one-half feet thick at the bottom, tapering
to eighteen inches at the top. Five adobe rooms were built in a row on the west
side, the fort wall answering for the outside wall of the rooms. A two-story
dwelling house was erected in the southwest corner, and a large two-story
bastion with portholes to be used in defense against the Indians, stood in the
southeast corner. Sheds and corrals were built on the inner east side, with a
granary, blacksmith shop and chicken coop on the west and north. The well was
dug in the center. Just outside the fort were planted an apple orchard and
vegetable garden, and on the outer south side was the farm that was irrigated
with water from Johnson's Spring.

The area was abandoned temporarily in 1853 because of the Walker War, the
settlers returning in 1854. By 1859 the Indians had become less troublesome,
and Laban Morrell and the Dalley brothers, who had long been eyeing the fertile
land on the eastern foothills, moved their families to this "summit" between
Cedar Fort and Parowan, \[p.137\] appropriately naming the place "Summit." Other
families drifted away, as well.

And Johnson's Fort? As with so many other early fortifications, eventually
there was nothing left to show it had ever existed. The little hamlet called
"Enoch" now marks the spot, and only in the memories of the few who saw it
before it crumbled into nothingness is there an assurance that it once stood,
fearlessly guarding the precious cattle belonging to the early builders of Iron
County.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 11, p.557

The following spring Joel H. Johnson, on advice of Brigham Young, took his
sister, Julia Babbitt, and four children to Council Bluffs. Her purpose was to
transact some business connected with the estate and to make a general
investigation of the whole situation. Joel's diary reads:

June 7, 1857. Started early and camped for the night on Prairie Creek, near
where A.W. Babbitt's train was broken up last fall by the Indians. We saw the
graves where those that were killed were buried, but the wolves had dug their
bodies up and devoured them, for we saw the bones and hair and grave \[p.558\]
clothes scattered about the ground. We camped for the night at that crossing of
the creek. (End of quote.)

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 12, p.172

Kanab. In early 1872 Bishop Stewart spoke in the ward teachers' meeting of his
hope that a co-operative store could soon be established. In the next year,
with the bishop as chairman and M. F. Farnsworth, secretary, a constitution was
drafted and the business incorporated for a period of three years under the
name of Z.C.M.I. of Kanab. The capital stock, priced at $5.00 a share, began
with $1,000, with the stipulation it could be increased to a maximum of
$25,000. Owned by different stockholders, the amounts held ranged from one-half
to eighty shares. Thomas Robertson was elected vice-president; Elijah Averett
and Ensign Riggs, directors. The company rented store space in Bishop Stewart's
home and the enterprise began under the managership of W. D. Johnson. Later a
small building was constructed north of the fort. Joel Johnson was hired as
clerk while W. D. Johnson remained the manager. The stock was purchased from
Z.C.M.I. in Salt Lake City. ---History of Kanab.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 13, p.496

Hillsdale. Joel Hills Johnson and George Deliverance Wilson established a
sawmill in 1871 near the present location of Hillsdale, and were soon joined by
twenty families, including those of Seth and Nephi Johnson. The latter, who
discovered Zion Canyon, was made bishop of the new settlement in 1874. Recently
displaced from the Muddy Mission in Nevada, Wilson, a millwright \[p.497\] by
trade, had made a temporary home in Panguitch while searching for a permanent
residence. A poor man, he had arrived with his wife and seven children, one
wagon and one yoke of oxen. Johnson, who was better fixed, financed the
erection of the sawmill, and built up the little village. It was given the name
of Hillsdale in his honor.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 13, p.508-509

Four Johnson brothers, Joel Hills, Joseph Ellis, Benjamin Franklin, and William
Derby settled Johnson in the spring of 1871. The town is situated northeast of
Kanab, Kane County, in a canyon bordered on both sides by sand bluffs. A short
distance below the settlement, the canyon opens out into the broad desert,
which is bordered on the south by the Buckskin Mountains (Kaibab). Joel Hills
Johnson writes in his journal: "On January 23, 1871, I was in the home of
President Brigham Young in St. George. About that time the President suggested
to us that the Johnson family have what was called Spring Canyon Ranch twelve
miles north of Kanab, for a stock ranch and for all the family who wished to
settle there and requested us to go and look at it, which we agreed to do as
soon as we conveniently could."

"On January 23, 1871, I started for home and arrived late in the evening having
previously made arrangements to meet my brothers and some others at Virgin City
on our way out to look at Spring Canyon Ranch, near Kanab, agreeable to the
request of President Young. We accordingly went out and found a beautiful
canyon half to a mile wide and several miles long covered with grass with small
springs coming out at the foot of bluffs on each side and a small beautiful
stream running from the mouth of the Canyon, with plenty of building rock,
fencing timber, and fire wood, and plenty of excellent grass for meadow and
stock range extending for miles around. We were highly pleased with the place
and concluded to accept the President's offer. Therefore we made arrangements
for some of us to move there in the spring and start a co-operative stock
association for herding stock and dairy purposes."

In March, Joel moved his wife, Susan, and their two boys Joel and Almon to
Johnson. His brother William moved his family while his brother Joseph sent out
three young men. His two \[p.509\] boys Nephi and Sixtus moved part of their
families. Then with the tools, grain, and seeds of every kind for gardening,
they went to work, planted trees, vineyards, and built cabins. Others began
plowing and planting gardens.

In October word came from Kanab that the Navajos were going to make a raid and
the Johnsons moved to Kanab. The Navajos came, but only for a friendly visit,
so the people moved back to Johnson, found water had dried up and they became
discouraged; hence, they decided to go to raising stock. Later they began
digging out the springs and found they had plenty of water. The land became
very productive, other families began moving in and Johnson became a town. A
brick schoolhouse was built which was used for church as well as social
gatherings. From the time of the settlement until Aug. 7, 1877, Sixtus Ellis
Johnson, son of Joel, presided over the branch. Then he was made bishop,
succeeded in 1879 by William Derby Johnson. By June 1901 only a few families
remained in Johnson. At the present time (1959), only a few ranches are
scattered through the canyon.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 13, p.539-540

Mountain Dell was situated on North Creek, four miles up that stream from
Virgin in a valley about a quarter of a mile wide. The settlement dates back to
1861 when Joel H. Johnson, at the request of Erastus Snow, built a sawmill in
the canyon \[p.540\] through which North Creek emerges into the more open country
below. With the help of Simon Anderson, he erected the mill, which furnished
lumber for the homes in Virgin, Duncan's Retreat and Mountain Dell. He also
started a nursery, where the early settlers obtained all kinds of fruit trees.
Stock raising was also a principal industry.

The Johnsons were the only family living in the neighborhood until 1863 when
other settlers moved in and a branch of the Church was effected, with Joel H.
Johnson as presiding elder. He was succeeded in 1869 by Owen Isom. The
difficulty of getting water out of the Virgin River for irrigation purposes has
been a long and bitter story in Utah's "Dixie." The tiny settlement Mountain
Dell was no exception.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 15, p.124

In the month of August I \[William Reynolds Terry\] moved on a patent claim,
built a cabin and fenced and broke twelve acres. April 15, 1845, our sixth
child and third son, Benjamin Franklin, was born. In the middle of May 1845, I
traded my mill property to Joel H. Johnson for two lots and a story and a half
brick house, a good well of water and a back stone house (cellar) in the town
of Macedonia for $500. In the month of September, the mob began to burn wheat
stacks and turn the Saints out of doors, sick and well, old and young. We were
on guard day and night, and moved most of our goods to the city of Joseph for
safety, so we suffered very much at night for need of beds and clothing. My
wife tied the children's bonnets and shoes on at night expecting our houses to
be burned to ashes by the mobs.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 15, p.223-228

Joel Hills Johnson

My father, Ezekiel Johnson, was born at Oxbridge, Massachusetts, January 12,
1776. My mother's name was Julia Hills, born at Upton, Massachusetts, September
26, 1773. They were married at Grafton, Massachusetts January 12, 1801, and I
was born at Grafton, Massachusetts March 23rd, 1802. When I was a small child
my parents emigrated to the state of Vermont where they lived about nine years
and in the year of 1813 my parents let me go with my Uncle Joel Hills, for whom
I was named, to Newport in the state of Kentucky, on the opposite side of the
Ohio River from Cincinnati. In the spring of 1815, my father came and took me
to Pomphret, Chautauqua County, New York, where I lived with him until I was 21
years of age, March 23rd, 1823. I had little or no opportunity for education
but was very religious from a small child, not daring to transgress the will of
my parents or do the least thing I thought was wrong. I always attended
religious meetings and studied my books by firelight after I had done my work.

I bought a sawmill and a lot of land and built a house. My sisters kept house
for me until the second day of November 1826, when I married Anna P. Johnson,
daughter of Timothy Johnson, Esq. She was born August 7, 1800. In the year 1829
I invented and patented the shingle cutter, or machine, now used for making or
cutting shingles throughout the United States and Canada. The patent is dated
the 8th day of December 1829, signed "Andrew Jackson, President and Martin Van
Buren, Vice-President of the United States."

In the fall of 1830 I moved my family to the town of Amherst, Lorain County,
state of Ohio. I there became acquainted with the Book of Mormon and the Elders
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; was baptized into the
Church on the first day of June, 1831; and was ordained an Elder of the Church
on the 20th of Sept. following and was appointed to preside over the Amherst
Branch of the Church, numbering about 100 members. I attended the first October
Conference of the Church. It was held in Orange Township, Ohio, in 1831, where
I first beheld the face of the Prophet Joseph Smith and heard the words of life
from his mouth which filled my heart with joy and thanks to God.

In January, 1832, I went on a mission to the state of New York, preaching the
Gospel and visiting my father's family in Pomphret. They willingly heard and
believed, and my mother and some others were baptized in Pomphret. On my return
home I baptized many in and about Amherst and ordained several Elders and
Priests. In July, 1833, President Smith counseled me to move to Kirtland and
buy out certain obnoxious individuals, \[p.224\] which I did. I was there when
the foundation of the Temple was laid and built a sawmill for its benefit.

August 26, 1835, went on a short mission through the southeastern part of Ohio,
preached in many cities and towns, baptized several and returned home. I
labored preaching in all the towns about Kirtland, baptized many and ordained
several Elders and Priests. Received a blessing under the hands of the
Presidency for my labors in preaching and assisting to build the Lord's House.
I was present at the calling and ordination of the first Twelve Apostles---also
at the calling and ordination of all the different Quorums of the Church. I
attended the dedication of the Lord's House on the 27th of March, 1836, and all
the meetings and counsels that followed....

I helped to organize the Kirtland camp in 1838 and traveled with it as far as
Springfield, Illinois; was called by Council to stop there and take care of the
sick. I commenced preaching and soon gathered a branch of the Church of forty
members over which I presided until January 8, 1839, when the Lord showed me by
revelation that I must immediately go to Carthage in Hancock County. I packed
up, went with my family, and commenced preaching in Carthage and vicinity; and
baptized many and organized a branch of the Church of about fifty members
called the Crooked Creek Branch. In February 1840, I purchased a sawmill and a
piece of land on Crooked Creek, onto which I moved my family. In July we, as a
branch of the Church, were organized into a Stake of Zion, with all of its
officers and Quorums. I was ordained High Priest and President of the Stake
under the hands of Hyrum Smith. A town was laid out and built up by the Saints.
On the 11th day of September, 1840, my wife Anna died and left me with five
small children; and on the 20th of October following, I married Susan Bryant.
In the winter of 1842, President Smith and Council thought it best to
disorganize the Stake on account of a secret organized band of false brethren
that had crept in amongst us. I was honorably discharged from further duties as
president.

On the 13th of November following the martyrdom, I was appointed to preside
over a small branch of the Church called the Pleasant Vale Branch. October
24th, 1845, I took to wife, Janet Fife, a Scotch lady. On the 31st day of
December myself and wife, Susan, received our endowments in the Lord's House in
Nauvoo. On the first day of May, 1846, about 2 o'clock at night I was called to
the door by an armed mob of about 100 men who had surrounded my house, and who
asked me if I were preparing to leave. I told them that I was. They told me if
I was not gone by the first day of June my life would be taken and my property
destroyed; after many more threats they left.

\[p.225\] Out of four or five thousand dollars worth of property that I owned in
Hancock County, all that I could raise to help me get away was one horse team
worth only seventy-five dollars, one yoke of oxen, and a borrowed wagon. On the
last day of May, I loaded my family into the wagon leaving everything else
behind, and started for Knox County, Illinois, where I had claim on an 80-acre
soldier's right of land, and arrived there on the 4th day of June, 1846. While
in Knox County the Lord blessed me with means in a wonderful manner so that by
the 6th of May, 1848, I was able to start west with three wagons and sufficient
teams well-loaded with family possessions, necessaries, provisions, tools, etc.
With a few calves and sheep we arrived at Winter Quarters on the Missouri River
the first week in June. We tarried four weeks waiting for company, and started
on the 5th day of July in Willard Richards' camp, and arrived at Salt Lake the
19th day of October, 1848.

I stopped at the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon and was ordained Bishop of Mill
Creek Ward, and elected Justice of the Peace and a member of the Legislature of
Deseret for 1849 and 1850. In the fall of 1850 I was selected to assist George
A. Smith in forming a settlement at Little Salt Lake. I sent with him my two
oldest sons, with two teams laden with provisions, seed, farming tools, iron
mill saws, etc, and in the spring I went down with stock and several more teams
laden with necessaries for the new settlement. At the organization of the city
of Parowan, County Court and High Council, I was elected one of the City
Councilmen, Selectman, and one of the High Council; and on the 19th day of
November, 1851, I was sent by George A. Smith to the Springs, 12 miles south of
Parowan to make a fort, myself a farm, and herd the stock for Parowan and Cedar
City. The same is still called Fort Johnson. In the fall of 1855 I attended the
Second Judicial District Court held at Fillmore, Utah as petit juror. December
10th the Legislature assembly convened or met in the State House at Fillmore
and I was elected Chaplain of the House which office I filled during the
session.

In the spring of 1857 I was called on a mission to the States and started on
the 6th day of April, and arrived at Florence on the Missouri River the 18th
day of June, and returned to Salt Lake City again on the 5th day of October,
1860. On the 11th of October I went to President Young's office and had
Margaret Threbkeld, an English lady, sealed to me by the President, and arrived
at my house in Iron County on the 29th of October, being absent from home over
three years. My labors were mostly in preaching to the people in Iowa, and
presiding at Genoa in Nebraska.

In the fall of 1861 I moved my family down to Virgin City. I was then sent by
President Erastus Snow up North Creek about \[p.226\] 6 miles to build a sawmill,
which I accomplished and planted out large orchards, vineyards and made many
other improvements. In July, 1866, I sold out at North Creek and moved back to
Virgin City, and on the first day of May, 1868, I moved to Bellevue. After I
was baptized in 1831 I never lived but a short time in one place while in the
States on account of mob violence; and since I have been in Utah have made
eleven new places. I have written nearly 1000 spiritual hymns and sacred songs
now in manuscript entitled "Zion's Songster" or the Songs of Joel, a few of
which have been published in the Church works....

Benjamin F. Johnson's book, My Life's Review, states that Joel Hills Johnson
died

September 23, 1882 at Johnson, Kane County, Utah.

### High On The Mountain Top

---Joel H. Johnson

    High on the mountain top
    A banner is unfurled; Ye nations, now look up,
    It waves to all the world. In Deseret's sweet, peaceful land---
    On Zion's mount behold it stand! For God remembers still
    His promise made of old, That He on Zion's hill
    Truth's standard would unfold; Her light should there attract the gaze
    Of all the world in latter days.

A winter long remembered. No wonder the winter of 1880 found me well-housed on
a bleak, desolate waste near the old Sevier River in Utah. Well-housed we were,
in a string of six log cabins freshly daubed with mud and a six-inch covering
of earth on the roof. But we were content, for no one in the little town had
better. The winters were cold and long, so like the ant and the bee, we were
expected to prepare for winter with a well-filled larder. The threshing was
done and the golden grain was in the bin, and we were waiting for a lull in
fall work to haul the grist to the mill, ten miles away. The power to run the
mill was generated from water taken from the river, therefore, all grinding
must be done before winter set in. Our butter and cheese were made in the
summer and laid away in safe casks for winter use. From Dixie came a barrel of
molasses and some sun-dried fruit, for which we had traded lumber, wheat,
potatoes, or something raised in the higher altitude. An ox or a cow and two
hogs was our meat supply for the winter and well into the spring.

The winter of 1879-80 is one long to be remembered by all who lived on the old
Sevier. The fall of 1879 found us unprepared for the winter, with three feet of
snow covering the ground \[p.227\] early in November, two months earlier than we
had ever known before. Along with this early snow it turned intensely cold,
freezing up the gristmill, also most of our vegetable supply. I remember well
the jingle of the frozen spuds, as we threw them into the pot to be boiled.
Then there was the grind, grind, grind of the coffee mill as we took turns at
the crank to make our flour. I was only a boy of ten and I am sure the crank
put muscles on my arm. I did some complaining on the side, but my mother
consoled me with "Suppose we did not have the mill or grain...."

At the old log schoolhouse we would gather for a drama, a dance, or a spelling
contest. All were supposed to take part. The older people staged short plays
while the younger ones came out in song or dialogue, and the little tots gave
us "Little Robert Reed" or "There Came to My Window one Morning in Spring," or
something equally as appropriate. In one end there was a large fireplace where
the smoke and the blaze roared up the chimney and the weird light from the
pitch pine logs east a glow across the rough pine floor, while the tallow
candles on the wall would seem to wink at the characters that would be classed
as masqueraders in this day. Our pants and shirts were often bedecked with
buckskin, and on our necks was a bandana, loosely tied. Old Chris would saw on
his fiddle and we would grab and swing "The Girl I Left Behind Me," who was all
dressed up in linsey with a white collar crocheted by mother. The prompter
calls, "Balance all" and the hobble-de-hoy boy shakes his hob-nailed shoes
before his lass. "Swing," calls the prompter, and around her waist he takes his
lady and around and around they go like a new red top. If the muscles of the
older people were stiffened, they could limber them up by parading in Money
Musk or Upper Gent and Lower Lady; but all must take part as the fiddler was
already paid with carrots, spuds, or grain. The lad who would be kind to his
partner would dig deep into his pocket for a handful of parched corn or a waxy
stick of candy. After the ball we trudged home through deep snow to our warm
cabins.

Spring came and all nature seemed to take on new life. We had one cow and a
yoke of oxen left. The bones of our herd lay bleaching in the warm spring sun.
As we took on new life we would try to forget our faithful cow or ox, and with
new energy we prepared for another crop.

Fifty winters have come and gone since then. One-half of a century has made
deep wrinkles on my brow, and frosted my scanty locks, but it seems but a day
since I sat in that old cabin home. There were newspapers pasted on the walls,
a homemade rag carpet on the floor. In the corner stood an old organ, on its
stool sat my mother. She sang as she played, "Be It Ever So Humble, There's No
Place Like Home." I have listened to the chimes of the mighty pipe organ; I
have sat, with bowed head, \[p.228\] in temples of stone where the artists of
music rehearsed Beethoven's symphonies, but God grant that the echoes of that
sweet voice in my rustic home may vibrate against my tombstone till Gabriel's
trumpet calls. ---Joel H. Johnson, Jr.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 15, p.241

In July 1838, we started for Missouri in what is known as the Kirtland Camp,
consisting of all the poor still remaining at Kirtland, and all who were able
and willing to help them. Our company consisted of 515, nearly all in poor
circumstances, with sixty wagons. Our trip was a very hard and trying one, we
were often without food, and there was much sickness in the camp. At Dayton,
Ohio, we stopped for awhile to work on the National Turnpike and give the sick
a chance to recover. While here, my mother and my brother, Joel Hills Johnson,
and other kindred who lived in that city came to our aid. During our stay here
threats were made that we should not pass through Mansfield alive, but when we
were ready we started in close procession, the women driving teams and the men
walking along side. On nearing the town, we were met by two horsemen who rode
down on each side of our columns, seeming to be counting our wagons and forces
as they passed along. After satisfying themselves they returned to the town
where a large crowd had collected, firing cannons and beating drums and seemed
to be much excited, but we passed through and were not molested. We afterward
learned that the horsemen had given the crowd assembled a very exaggerated
account of our numbers and armament. In Springfield, Illinois, a council was
held and it was decided to leave the sick here for the present. My \[George
Washington Johnson\] brothers, Joel, Joseph, and the rest of the family, except
Benjamin, were detained to remain with them to take care of the sick.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 16, p.245

Other sawmills were built by George Wilson and Joel Johnson, and the Buffer
Brothers built a shingle mill on Panguitch Creek. Later Elijah Elmer and the
Miller Brothers, Allen and Ninian, built a sawmill above the town at the mouth
of Panguitch Creek.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 17, p.131

Enoch---First known as Johnson Springs for Joel Johnson who settled there in
1852. A change of name was required in order to establish a post office and
Enoch selected because some of the settlers were living the Order of Enoch.

Our Pioneer Heritage, Vol. 20, p.451

Hanauer Camp East Center Salt Lake County, Utah

The original boundaries of Millcreek Ward, organized in 1849 with Joel H.
Johnson as bishop, were from Twenty-first South to Forty-fifth South and from
the Jordan River on the west to the Wasatch Mountains on the east. For several
years this ward had the largest membership in the Church, and from it were
eventually created eight stakes.

LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, Andrew Jenson, Vol. 2, p.597

Brackenbury, Joseph Blanchett, the first Elder in the Church who died as a
martyr in the missionary field, was born Jan. 18, 1788, in Lincolnshire,
England, and emigrated to America when quite young. Becoming a convert to
"Mormonism", he was baptized and confirmed April 10, 1831, by John Corrill and
Solomon Hancock. He was ordained an Elder the day after his baptism and started
on a mission in 1831. While filling that mission he died suddenly Jan. 7, 1832,
at Pomfret, Chautauqua co., New York, from the effects of poison administered
by his enemies. The doctors attempted to dig him up to use his body as a
subject for dissection, but were hindered in their intentions by Elder Joel H.
Johnson, who was warned in a dream of the matter in progress, and rose from his
bed at 11 o'clock at night. Together with his brother David he went to the
grave and succeeded in arresting one of the parties while at work with a spade
and a hand sledge. The intended grave robber was bound to appear at court,
being placed under $1000 bond, but his case never came to trial. He is first
mentioned as an Elder at the June, 1831, conference held at Kirtland, Ohio, and
was ordained a High Priest Oct. 25, 1831, by Oliver Cowdery.

LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, Andrew Jenson, Vol. 4, p.444

Johnson, Joel Hills, Bishop of the Mill Creek Ward, Cottonwood Stake, Utah,
from 1849 to 1851, was born in Grafton, Mass., and was ordained a Bishop April
8, 1849. He died Sept. 24, 1882.

LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, Andrew Jenson, Vol. 4, p.502

Johnson, Joel Hills, Bishop of the Kanab Ward, Kanab Stake, Utah, from 1890 to
1901, and second counselor in the Kanab Stake presidency from 1901 to 1910, was
born Nov. 16, 1860, in Virgin City, Utah, the son of Nephi Johnson and Mandana
Merrill. He was baptized when nine years old, moved to Kanab in 1876, and was
ordained a Bishop Sept. 21, 1890, by Francis M. Lyman. He died at Salt Lake
City Oct. 22, 1924.

Susan Martineau, "Joseph Smith," Young Woman's Journal 17:541

As a child I often saw the Prophet in the Sunday meetings in the \[Kirtland\]
temple, and also at the house of my father, Joel H. Johnson, but my more
distinct recollections begin about 1841, when we lived in Ramus, afterward
named Macedonia, about twenty miles from Nauvoo, where father was presiding
elder. The Prophet frequently came to our house and sometimes stayed overnight.
On one occasion Joseph, with Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant and some
others from Nauvoo, whose names I do not now remember, partook \[page 542\] of a
Christmas dinner at my father's; and standing at the head of the table, carved
the turkey. Fearing that his clothing might accidentally be soiled, my
stepmother, Susan Bryant Johnson, tied a long apron upon him. He laughed and
said it was well for he did not know what might happen to him. My brother Seth
and I were in the room, admiring, in our childish way, him whom we thought the
greatest man on earth.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF SUSAN ELLEN JOHNSON\[1\]

\[page 1\] My father, Patriarch Joel Hills Johnson, was baptized into the Church
of Latter Day Saints, June 1, 1831, at the age of 29 years. I was born in
Kirtland, Ohio, July 11, 1836, and when two years old our people were driven
from Kirtland, and so we started for Missouri with the Kirtland camp.

When we reached Springfield, Illinois, there was considerable sickness in the
camp. My father's family was among the number compelled or counseled to stay
there until all was well. While tarrying there the people were driven out of
Missouri, so my father did not go there, but waited in a small town where there
was a large family named Merrill. Father baptized Samuel Merrill and several
members of his family, among them being Phillemon Merrill, now a Patriarch. We
stayed at this place, Father preaching and baptizing until his work was done.
Then we went to Carthage, Missouri, where my brother, Seth, was born, March 9,
1839. We lived near the jail where the prophet Joseph Smith and his brother
Hyrum were in later days slain and sealed their testimonies to the truth of the
Gospel they preached. At this time our family consisted of seven souls. We
moved from Carthage to Crooked Creek, to Debberts Mill.

### MY FATHER'S RECORD

Joel Hills Johnson was born at Grafton, Massachusetts, March 23, 1802. He died
at Johnson, Utah, 1882. Anna Pixley Johnson, his wife, was born at Canaan, New
Hampshire, August 7, 1800. She died, September 15, 1840. They were married at
Pomfret, New York, November 2, 1826.

### BIRTHS

Julian was born at Pomfret, New York, October 7, 1827.

\[page 2\] Sixtus Ellis was born at Pomfret, New York, October 8, 1829, died June
4, 1916, Ponerene, Arizona.

Sarah Annie was born at Amherst, Ohio, February 18, 1832.

Nephi was born at Kirtland, Ohio, December 12, 1833.

Susan Ellen was born at Kirtland, Ohio, July 11, 1836.

Seth was born at Carthage, Illinois, March 6, 1839.

Having bought an interest in the Debberts Mill, the house was built of logs
consisting of two rooms connected by a shed room, open to the front. There was
where my mother died, September 15, 1840, age 40 years, a kind and indulgent
mother, a good faithful Latter Day Saint. She was buried in a cemetery of a
small town called Macedonia.

Susan Bryant then came to live with us as housekeeper. Father married her, as
his children needed a mother's care.

Soon after we moved to Ramus. Father built a house there for a family
residence. He afterwards built a room on for a store. My Aunt Almira lived with
us at that time and taught school. She was sealed to the Prophet Joseph as his
first plural wife (not correct). After several years our home was sold to A.
\[Almon\] W. Babbitt who named it the Macedonian Cottage. After a time we went
back to the saw mill.

One day Seth and I were out playing by the wood-pile, our parents having gone
to Hauven. We saw some men marching towards our house. We ran and fastened the
door and dived under the bed. They came to the door and knocked on it with a
club and said, "Come out or it will be the worse for you." We came and stood in
the door, hand in hand and very much frightened; they asked where our parents
were. We told them, and they said, \[page 3\] "Tell your father when he comes
home he must leave here immediately or he will lose his life and also his
property." When Father returned we told him what the mob had said to us. He
said he would make preparations to go as soon as he could. But we were delayed
on account of sickness in the family.

In the latter part of April we were awakened in the night by an armed mob on
horses. They went through their military maneuvers and finally stopped before
the door. They called Johnson to come out. Father went to the door partly
dressed with my step-mother holding to his hand. They asked why he had not left
as he had been told to. He said he had been sick. The mob said they would give
him until the fifteenth of May, and "if you are not gone by that time we will
burn your house over your head. Now this is the last warning, so you had better
leave...for we won't have no d--- Mormons in the country." After talking some
time they wheeled around and left the place.

My father tried to sell his property to get an outfit to go with. A man came
from Knoxlo and offered some land for the mill property which consisted of, a
saw mill and some timber land, a log house, a garden spot, and also some land
under cultivation, for land at Knoxlo, a good farm under cultivation, and a
good house.

My father and Uncle Joseph made the exchange, and we went to Macedonia, not
into the town, but into the woods. My father fitted out two teams, one yoke of
oxen, and one span of old horses with wagons to match. We started on our
journey of several hundred miles.

We also had three cows, six sheep, that being all our worldly possessions. Just
before sun down on Saturday night we went 5 miles and \[page 4\] camped for the
night. In the morning we proceeded on our journey.

When we arrived at our destination we found ourselves in a large open prairie
until in the following spring when we moved to the ward house. My brother Seth
and myself walked 1-1/2 miles to school. During the summer we all had the ague,
and no one was able to wait on another. So every morning before the chill came
on we prepared for it by drinking composition. We all took quinine and were
cured.

My step-mother went to Chicago to visit her sister, and my brother Sixtus went
with her. It was while she was there that the family were all sick.

My Uncle George Johnson went to Nauvoo in February, 1848, and I went with him
to live with my grandma who was quite old and feeble. We came near freezing
several times. The last night out we went into a log hut, and I was so cold
that I shivered all night over the fire. In the morning we went to a house of a
family named Beay where we warmed ourselves. In a short time we arrived at the
home of A. \[Almon\] W. Babbitt where my grandma lived with her daughter, Julia,
Babbitt's wife.

My sister Sariah, having lived with my grandmother for several years, being a
young lady, my father thought it best to take her with him to California. On
May 8, 1848, my father with his family came to Nauvoo on his way across the
plains. The family consisted of eight persons.

On the tenth of May they crossed the Mississippi River. I went one day's
journey and returned to Nauvoo the next day. It was very hard to see them go
and leave me behind, but I felt that it must be, and I must make the best of
it. My dear grandmother was good and kind to me, or I could not have borne the
parting from brothers and sisters. But I have found that life is not all
sunshine.

\[page 5\] One July 4th the Nauvoo temple was hired by some Gentiles for a grand
ball and supper at $5.00 per couple. I, only being 12 years of age, wished to
go, as I had never been to a ball and thought it would be a fine thing. But
when I approached my grandma on the subject, she wept and said, "The temple has
been desecrated and will be destroyed." This later proved to be true.

In November we were awakened by a bright light. I ran to the window and saw the
steeple in flames. The fire must have started in the room below the steeple as
there was no light in the lower story until the steeple fell in. At this time
we were living in a house built by John Taylor, several streets below the hill.
I had many mementos of the fire, but have nothing now.

In the June following, my grandmother, myself, David Le Baron and family, David
Wilson, William Johnson and wife, and also Uncle Joseph J. Johnson sent a wagon
with goods (to) Aunt Delcina and family. We arrived at Council Bluffs on July
11th, my 13th birthday.

We then moved to Plum Hollow. We got there in July and remained there during
the summer. During the winter I attended school. In the early spring Uncle
Joseph and Grandma moved to Kanesville. In June my mother's sister Sarah
Johnston came for me to go to California (as Utah was then called).

We left Kanesville June 25th and camped by the Missouri River. We waited there
several days for more company, and on the 27th crossed the river and found some
emigrants waiting for us. There were now 28 wagons with Stephen Markham as
Captain. Our company was divided into tens with Artemus Millet as Captain on
the first ten, Thomas Forsythe as Captain \[page 6\] of the second ten.

In the morning a woman died with cholera and was buried on the bank of the
river. She was a stranger, having just arrived from England on her way to Utah.
From that time until the 15th of July some one was buried almost every day. My
Aunt Sarah's husband, George G. Johnston, his mother and his sister died July
11th, on my 14th birthday and were buried when we stopped at noon the next day,
July 12th.

I also had cholera but was healed by the administration of the Elders. When I
felt the disease coming on I went into a tent by myself and prayed to the Lord
that I might be spared to wait upon the others. I had a testimony (that) I
would be spared. There were 14 (who) died in our company.

After July had passed there was no more sickness in the camp except a sister
Millet who gave birth to a son. (He was named Liberty). We laid over at Ash
Hollow for repairs.

The next day after we passed Fort Kearney, a soldier who had deserted came to
our camp and asked if he might go with us. The Wristen boys took him in, (and)
put him to bed with a night cap on. When the soldiers came after him and
searched the wagons they only found a sick woman. They said if we only knew his
character we would have nothing to do with him which proved true, for he stole
the clothing of those who had befriended him. I saw him in Salt Lake City in
1851. He was working on the street with a ball and chain fastened to his leg.

One noon while camped at the foot of some steep hills which were covered with
ripe choke cherries, I with others went to gather some, intending to overtake
the wagons. But on reaching the road, they were entirely out of sight. We
followed all the afternoon, and at dark came to the forks of the road. By
feeling along the track with our hands \[page 7\] we found they had gone the
river road. We soon found a young man waiting for us on horseback. He knew we
were gone and feared that we might get lost. It was 10 o'clock when we reached
camp. His name was Andy Kelly. That was the last time I ever wandered away from
camp.

We traveled up the south side of the Platte River, and came upon a band of
Cheyenne Indians who were hunting buffalo for their winter meat. The Indians
looked neat and clean, they seemed very friendly. Some of our company bought
buffalo robes and moccasins from them.

My Uncle George Johnston having died, I traveled with Captain Forsythe, working
for them in camp to pay my way. They were very kind to me. I walked many weary
miles every day. At night when the ground was smooth enough we would join in a
dance to rest our weary feet, or have songs and recitations or plays until
called for prayers by Captain Markham. We all went to rest but the guards who
were on duty for the night.

We passed hundreds of graves. Many an evening we saw thousands of buffalo in
herds. We passed Independence Rock. It was probably 200 yards (wide) and 10 or
12 yards high, rising out of the level plain. In the smooth side of the rock
were carved or written hundreds of names of those that had passed.

One night we camped near a band of Cheyennes. The following day, being rainy,
we remained in camp. The Indians, old and young, came into camp trading
moccasins and robes. Among the rest was a fine looking young Indian who wanted
to buy a squaw. Offering some fine ponies, Andy Kelly asked him who he wanted,
and I was pointed out as his choice on account of my dark eyes and rosy cheeks.
Kelley finally made a trade for five ponies, a buffalo robe, and the silver
ornaments on his \[page 8\] hair. In the evening he came with his ponies. Kelley
told him it was all a joke, that the girl belonged to another family. This made
the Indian mad, he said a trade was a trade. Then Captain Markham came and
explained to the Indian that Kelley was no good and had no right to do as he
had done. The Indian finally went away very indignant.

That night there was a high wind which blew down Aunt Sarah's tent. The tent
was placed facing our wagon with the back toward a deep ravine full of willows.
Aunt Sarah was holding the front tent pole and I the back, while two men were
driving stakes at the side. The night was pitch black, lighted at intervals by
flashes of lightning. Suddenly I felt strong arms lift me to the back of a
pony. I gave a terrified scream. At that instant a flash of lightning revealed
the situation to the men who came to my rescue. I slid off the horses's back
which the Indian mounted and escaped. He had been hiding in the ravine waiting
his chance for revenge, and but for the flash of lightning I would have been
carried off. An extra guard was placed for the night, but when morning came
everything that was loose, such as frying pans, skillets, and other cooking
utensils which had been put under the wagons, had disappeared, leaving the
company short of these articles. The band of Cheyennes disappeared also and
were seen no more by the company.

Platte River. Sometimes the river was quite deep so the teams swam across the
river while the wagons were ferried over. At other times the teams were driven
over. The women and children were carried over by the men, which made it very
hard on the men. I preferred to wade rather than be carried over. I waded.
Being of pretty good weight, \[page 9\] I might have been dropped into the water,
as the bottom was quite muddy.

When crossing Green River, a son of Captain Markham went hunting for ducks,
found a large one in the river, but when he got there it proved to be a bundle
of clothing lost by some poor man on his way to California for gold. Many lost
their lives in 1850 in search of gold.

In coming through Devil's Gate Pass some of our young people went over the hill
to see the sights. They said they saw the Devil's Chain and some other
curiosities. I did not go.

On October 3, 1850, we arrived in Salt Lake City, tired, weary, and foot sore.
I had walked a great deal of the way bare-footed, but I never faltered. Many
others were in the same condition. We went to Uncle B. F. Johnson's and took
dinner. My Aunt Sarah, having married a young man, William Mills, on the way,
went with me to my father's home in Big Cottonwood. I found my sister Sarah
there, married to John Eager. They had a girl baby six months old. They seemed
very happy together in a little one-roomed log house. Soon after, Aunt Sarah
and her husband also lived there.

My father was called to go with George A. Smith and a company of fifty others
to settle Iron County. He fitted out his two oldest sons and sent them down. He
prepared to go down in the spring. He sold out his home and farm to Pillemon
Merrill for a log house of two rooms in the city, the teams to go with them. In
November my step-mother give birth to twins, a boy and a girl. Soon my father
was ready to start. He moved his family to Salt Lake City. We heard that George
S. Smith and company had arrived at their destination on Christmas Day and held
a celebration.

In March, 1851, my father took his wife, Janet (five or fife ?) and family to
Iron County. My brother Seth, age twelve years, went with them. Here is where I
met Mary Knight. We had many good times together, I never had a dearer and
nearer friend than Mary. She afterwards married Charles H. Bassett.

In July, 1851, my brother Sixtus came back from Iron County after Mrs Edith
Merrill. They were married July 13th, and left for their new home the next day.
In March my step-mother's twin girl died. My father attended the funeral the
day before he started for Iron county, April 1851.

I attended school taught by Mrs. A. H. Goodrich Blair, a lovely woman and a
good teacher.

When my brother came to get married, Father sent word that he was to sell our
home and get ready to move to Iron County by September 1st, which we did in
company with Peter Shirts and family. Darwin Shirts drove our team of oxen. The
next day we came up to the rest of our company of three families with plenty of
boys and girls to make it pleasant at camping time. We would forget all about
being tired and have a good time together. After a trip of two weeks we reached
Parawan, Utah, our destination.

Sariah Workman, "Joseph Smith," Young Woman's Journal 17:542

My father's name is Joel H. Johnson. The Prophet used to come to our home
before I can remember. We moved from Kirtland the winter that the Saints were
driven from Missouri and settled at Carthage, Illinois.

Nephi Johnson, autobiography, typescript, LDS Archives, pg. 1

I was born in Kirtland, Lake County, Ohio, 12 December 1836. My father's name
was Joel H. Johnson. My mother's name was Anna P. Johnson. At the time of my
birth, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was building the temple
at Kirtland. My father, being an elder in the Church, was very busy assisting
getting the material together to build a sawmill nearby to saw lumber for the
temple. The first thing I can remember was going to the sawmill to watch my
father saw lumber.

We lived there until the spring of 1838 when my father took his family and
started with the Kirtland camp for Missouri. He went with them as far as
Springfield, Illinois, where he was left to take care of the sick. There was
quite a number in the camp who were not able to continue on with the company.
He stayed there till the spring of 1839 then he moved to Carthage, Hancock
County, Illinois. It was there I first saw the Prophet Joseph Smith. He came
with his brother, Hyrum, and stayed at my father's house one day, and then went
to Commerce, afterward on to Nauvoo on the Mississippi River.

My father began preaching the gospel near there and soon baptized the Merrill
and Perkins families. In the meantime he bought a sawmill on Crooked Creek. He
furnished some of the lumber for the jail they were building. Afterwards the
mob killed Joseph and Hyrum at the jail. My mother died while we were living at
the sawmill, the 11th of September, 1840. A short time after my mother's death,
a town was laid out and called Perkins Settlement or Ramas \[Ramus\], afterwards
Macedonia. A branch of the Church was organized, my father was called to
preside. We moved from the sawmill into the town, lived there till 1844. Soon
after Joseph and Hyrum were murdered, we moved five miles north on a farm,
lived there a while then moved back to Ramas, lived there till 1846.

My father traded his property for some land in Knot \[Knox?\] County, Illinois.
We had to leave our old home in a hurry to keep the mob from running us out as
they had many of the Saints. We worked hard and got us an outfit to follow the
Church to the West. In the spring of 1848, we arrived at Council Bluffs. We
stayed there about a month. We left there on the 4th of July in Franklin D.
Richards' company for the West. My father took a small herd of sheep with him.
I think they were the first sheep driven to Utah. I saw some Omaha Indians at
Winter Quarters. They were the first Indians I ever saw.

While we were on the Platte River about 250 miles from the Missouri River, I
was ahead of the company about one mile driving the sheep, \[and\] a war party of
Sioux Indians came up to me. When I saw them I thought maybe they would kill
me, but I knew I could not get away, so I waited \[page 1\] for them to come up
to me. They were very friendly. The chief took me on his horse behind him and
went back to the company, who gave the Indians some presents. The Indians went
on their way, feeling all right. Being ahead of the company driving sheep, I
killed several buffalo. Though I was only 14, the company praised me for being
a hunter. My oldest brother, Sixtus, killed lots of game along the road.

We arrived at Salt Lake Valley the 19th of October, 1848. At that time there
wasn't a house on the land where Salt Lake City now stands except the fort
which was built in 1847. My father bought some claims and a little log cabin
that some parties had built at the mouth of the Mill Creek Canyon, south of
Salt Lake City. When winter came, Father traded his sheep to Brigham Young; he
was afraid he could not feed them during the winter. My brother Sixtus and
myself worked in the canyon most of the winter getting our logs to build some
cabins and poles to make fences with in the spring.

In the spring of 1849 my father bought some land in the Big Cottonwood about
three miles from where they were living. We hauled the logs and poles we cut
onto the land and built a house. We fenced our land and started a good farm. In
the spring of 1849, the Mill Creek Ward was organized. They set my father apart
as bishop with Reuben Miller as first counselor and Leonard Harrington as
second counselor. We moved into our new place in the fall of 1849.

In the spring of 1850, we took out a ditch from Cottonwood to get the water on
our farm. That summer Father went in partners with Archibald Gardner to build a
gristmill on the Jordan River about two miles from where we lived. Father was
there most of the summer. My brother, Sixtus, Seth and myself raised a good
crop on the farm. I forgot to say that myself and brothers attended school
about four months during the winter of 1849. In the spring of 1850, my father
was called to go with President George A. Smith to make a settlement in
southern Utah, and on the 12th of December, 1850, my brother, Sixtus, and
myself started with two wagon teams and outfits. We left on my 17th birthday.
Father had to wait till he could get his business settled up. After a cold and
stormy trip, we arrived at the place where Parowan now stands.

On the 13th of January, 1851, after we were located, we made a road into the
canyon, built a fort to live in, took the water out on our land, fenced a field
and raised grain enough to last us until the next year. In the summer of 1851
Father came down and brought the family with him. The next spring Father took
the stock herd for the people of Parowan. Cedar City was also located that year
by Henry Lunt and others. We took care of all the loose stock of both
settlements. We located six miles north of Cedar City at a place afterwards
called Johnson's Springs.

My father built more houses at the springs and corrals for the cattle, for we
were still taking care of the cattle for the people of Cedar City and Parowan.
It was in the year 1854 that my father wrote the hymn "High on the Mountain
Top."

Mary Johnson Wilson, Memoirs, typsecript, BYU

In the year 1829, Grandfather Joel Hills Johnson invented and patented the
shingle cutter machine for making or cutting shingles used for many, many years
throughout the United States and Canada. The patent is dated the 8th of
December 1829, and is signed by Andrew Jackson, President, and by Martin Van
Buren Vice-President of the United States. . . .

Grandfather Joel Hills Johnson helped to organize the Kirtland Camp in 1838,
traveling with it as far as Springfield, Illinois, remaining there by call to
take care of the sick. He commenced preaching there and soon assembled a branch
of the Mormon Church numbering forty members over which he presided until
January 8th, 1839, going from there directly to Carthage, Hancock County,
following what to him was a direct revelation. Reaching Carthage, he at once
began preaching in that vicinity, baptizing many and organizing a branch of the
Church of about fifty members known as the Crooked Creek Branch.

Times and Seasons, Vol.1, Pg.77

Dear brethren, realizing that all the faithful are wishing to hear from the
Elders abroad, and to know how the work or pruning the vineyard, progresses in
these last days; I have thought proper to give you a short sketch of my, labors
since the 6th of July, 1838: for on that day I started from Kirtland, Ohio,
with my family in company with the camp of saints (called the Kirtland camp)
numbering in all women and children five hundred and fifteen souls fifty eight
teams, a large number of cows &c. This company consisted principally of the
poor saints of Kirtland with the sick, lame, blind and all that could not move
without assistance. -- We had a fine journey to Dayton Ohio, when we stopped
and labored four weeks on the turnpike then resumed our journey and arrived at
springfield, (the seat of government for Illinois) Sep. the 15th, and finding
that several in the camp were sick with fevers, the Council thought best for me
to stop and take care of them which I accordingly did by renting a house and
taking them into it and making other necessary provisions for their comfort. I
then commenced preaching in Springfield in my own hired house, but the
prejudice of the people (on account of the difficulties at Far West) were so
great that they generally would not hear, but a few were enquiring. When many
of the brethren who were coming from the east heard that I was in Springfield,
they turned thither and stopped also and I soon organized them into a branch of
the church called the Springfield branch over which I was appointed to preside,
after which we held our meetings in the Campbellite meeting house I continued
preaching in Springfield and its vicinity until January 8th, 1839, the church
at this time numbering about forty members in good standing. I then removed my
family to Carthage Hancock Co. Ill. in the vicinity of Crooked Creek; and in
April I baptized several and organized a branch of the church called the
crooked Creek branch over which I was chosen to preside, which I have
endeavored to do, preaching to the church and in other places until the present
time having had many calls for preaching which I could not attend to on account
of my ill health and indigent circumstances. I have baptized and confirmed in
this vicinity fifteen members, and Br. John E. Page has baptized several, and
James Carle two: this branch numbers about fifty members in good standing and
many more appear to be believing whom I hope will soon become Abrahams' seed
and heirs according to the promise, by being baptized for the remission of
their sins.

    Now let thy servants O our God!
    Be cloth'd with power divine;
    That they may spread thy truth abroad
    And cause the light to shine:

    'Mong nations who, in darkness are,
    For darkness fills the earth,
    That they may shun the devils snare
    By having a new birth.

    And gathering home to Zion's land,
    Which was to Joseph given:
    That they in safety their may stand,
    When Christ descends from heaven:

    To burn the wicked in his wrath,
    And to receive his bride;
    With righteousness to fill the earth,
    Which then is purified.

From your fellow laborer in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

JOEL H. JOHNSON.

Times and Seasons, Vol.1, Pg.176

-On Crooked Creak, near Fountaingreen, of Nervous Fever on the 18th Inst Sister
Anna P. Johnson, Consort of elder Joel H. Johnson, aged 40 years, one month.
and four days. -- Sister Johnson embraced the gospel in May 1831 at Amherst
Ohio, and has ever manifested an unshaken confidence in the same, both by word
and deed. She was a kind and attentive companion, and a tender and affectionate
mother. She died rejoicing in the hope of a glorious resurrection among the
just.

Times and Seasons, Vol.2, Pg.223

RAMUS, is situated in the midst of a beautiful and fertile country, surrounded
by a variety of prairie and timber land, the soil rich and productive. There
are several saw, and grist mills, with other machineries within a few miles.
Within the precincts of Ramus, as also in the adjacent country, there are wild
lands, cultivated farms, mills, machineries, &c., which can be purchased on
very reasonable terms. Within short distances are creeks with privileges for
erecting mills, machinery &c. Those wishing to purchase and settle on town lots
can be accommodated.

Ramus, is situated 50 miles west of Beardstown, 3 miles north east of Carthage,
the county seat of Hancock Co., 20 miles east of Nauvoo. It is undoubtedly as
healthy a situation as can be located in the western country. Therefore those
of our brethren emigrating from the east who feel disposed to visit Ramus, will
find it not inconvenient to call, as it is situated on the road leading from
Springfield Ill. through Beardstown in Nauvoo.

May the work of the Lord prosper and roll forth unto its final completion, and
the Saints be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord, is the prayer of
the Saints in this place.

    By order of the Branch:
    JOEL H. JOHNSON, Pres't.
    WILLIAM WIGHTMAN, Cl'k.

Times and Seasons, Vol.2, Pg. 373-374

### A POEM ON THE SUFFERING OF THE SAINTS IN MISSOURI,

By Joel H. Johnson

Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing, the rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed. He that sitteth
in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision. And break
them with a rod of iron; and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel.

### DAVID.

    No wonder why old David cried,
    "Why do the Heathen rage!"
    When we look round on every side
    And see them all engage:

    To persecute the saints of God,
    And take them for a prey;
    Bind them in chains and shed their blood
    And drive them far away.

    Their lands and houses left behind,
    Thus from their homes are cast;
    While Matrons, maids, and infants find
    No shelter from the blast.


    No orphans cry, nor widows tear,
    Can pity now receive;
    In weather cold and winter drear,
    Their firesides have to leave.

    Yes destitute of food and clothes,
    'Mong strangers seek employ;
    While earthly fiends and hellish foes,
    Still seek them to destroy.

    While some have bled upon their lands,
    Their testament to seal
    That they believe in God's commands,
    And what he does reveal.

    And were resolved t' obey the same,
    Though hell against them raise;
    And so have died for Jesus, name,
    Like saints in ancient days.

    How long O Lord shall men prevail,
    To kill and drive the saints?
    Let not, O God, thy promise fail,
    But hear thou their complaints!

    And let thy judgements be made known, 
    Until oppression cease,
    And wickedness shall all be gone,
    The earth be filled with peace.

    For thou hast promised in thy word
    That when the wicked rage,
    And press upon them like a flood,
    Thou woulds't for them engage.

    And now we do thy promise claim
    And will not give the rest;
    Until thou dos't fulfill the same,
    And make thy people bles't.

Messenger and Advocate (Apr 1835) William McLellin Pg.102

Having just returned from a most interesting meeting, where baptizing was
attended to, and while the curtains of night are drawn around me and I am
seated in the friendly family circle with some beloved brethren, although it is
snowing quite fast and is very cold, especially considering the season of the
year, while musing and meditating on the past, a thought suggested itself,
that, probably, a few lines from me would not be uninteresting to the readers
of your most valuable paper. -- During last summer and fall elders Joel Johnson
and Oliver Granger visited this neighborhood and preached a number of times.
They baptized none in this town, but elder J. preached also, in the town north
of this and baptized three or four.

Nauvoo Neighbor, p.1

The following is a list of the delinquent lands and city lots in the third ward
in the city of Nauvoo, for the year 1843.

Names. Lots. Block. Other Lands-Acres. Cost Am-t of Tax. Value

Joel Johnson 3 6 6 30 60

Far West Record, p. 22 par. 7

Br. Joel Johnson said that he had professed religion for a number of years,
also felt to bear testimony of the goodness of God, and to consecrate all to
the Lord.

History of the Church, Vol.3, Ch.9, p.103

Joel H. Johnson sold one of his oxen for ten dollars, the other came up with
the camp.

History of the Church, Vol.3, Ch.10, p.129

Sunday, August 19.--As usual a large congregation met With us and gave good
attention to the services of the day. Elder Joel H. Johnson, by the request of
Elders Young and Harriman, who presided, preached on the first principles of
the Gospel from Galatians i, in the forenoon. In the afternoon the sacrament
was administered agreeable to the commandments of the Lord.

History of the Church, Vol.4, Ch.26, p.454

A charge was then preferred against Thomas S. Edwards for assault and battery,
with evidence that a warrant was issued for his apprehension, and against
William W. Edwards for being accessory to the same. Unanimously resolved, that
Thomas S. Edwards also be expelled from the Church; and that the proceedings of
this meeting be published in the Times and Seasons. JOEL H. JOHNSON, President.
JOSEPH E. JOHNSON, Church Recorder.

History of the Church, Vol.7, Ch.36, p.524

Elder Joseph B. Brackenbury died at Pomfret from the effects of poison secretly
administered to him by opposers, who afterwards boasted that Mormon elders had
not faith enough to stand poison. The night after his burial there was a heavy
snowstorm, about half past eleven o'clock Joel H. Johnson dreamed that some
persons were digging up Brother Brackenbury's body, and was so exercised about
it that he called up some of the brethren and went to the spot, about one mile
distant, and found a party of doctors at work, who had nearly cleared the grave
of earth; the men fled with utmost precipitation. David Johnson took after the
largest one who was caught and bound over in one thousand dollar bonds for his
appearance at court, but was never tried.

Journal History, 15 Jul 1840, from Joel H. Johnson, Journal

Wednesday, July 15, \[1840\] On this date a Stake of the Church was organized at
Ramus, Hancock Co., Illinois, with Joel H. Johnson as president, Hyrum Smith in
charge of the meeting. (Journal of Joel H. Johnson of this date)

Journal History, 27 Dec 1840, ltr Angelina E. Robinson

Mother Smith takes her husband's death very hard. Joel Johnson has got his
second wife Susan Bryant. you will discover that I am not very systematic in my
composition, and I wish you to pass it by as an error common to all, I shall
not say much about your family, as I presume your wife will write by the same
person.

Historical Record, July 1888, JENSON--KIRTLAND CAMP, pg. 596

Sunday, 19th. Elder Joel Johnson preached to the camp in the morning, and the
sacrament was administered in the afternoon by Elders Johnson and Hale.

Heart Throbs of the West, Kate B. Carter, Vol.1, p.148-149

There were times when the Indians were employed and paid for their work as the
following item shows:

    Iron County,
    Elk Horn Springs,
    January 25, 1853.
    (The Indian name Pakwoots, signifying Cluster of Springs)

Mr. Editor---Dear Sir:

I employ several Piede Indians to assist in tending the herd and doing chores
about the house which I find as faithful to their trust as any white man I ever
employed. The Piedes are a different race from the Utahs, who are lazy,
insolent and thievish, while many of the Piedes are honest, faithful and
industrious. When employed and fed by the Whites they are a great help to the
farmers, for many of them will do as much work as most any white man in a day
and can be hired for their board and some small present, by way of old
clothing. I always feed them when they call on me. I have fed as many as thirty
strange Piedes at a time and afterwards, when I would be away from home and any
of them would find me, they would catch me by the hand or arm and give it a
hearty shake explaining to their Comrades, 'Kearshn, (the name by which I am
known among them) Towich a Wino, (very good).' They are a great benefit to me
in herding, clearing land, putting in and securing crops, etc.

Yours as ever,  
Joel H. Johnson."

Heart Throbs of the West, Kate B. Carter, Vol.3, p.27

Another of the very early sawmills was built about six miles northeast of
Virgin by Joel H. Johnson. It was in good running order between 1858 and 1862.
It had a wooden water wheel and would saw up and down by water power. It took
only one man to operate it. This mill was finally shut down prior to 1873,
when, under the direction of the church, three circular saws were taken out to
Mr. Trumbull to saw out lumber for the St. George Temple. After the closing of
the Johnson mill, people in that locality became very discouraged because of
the great distance they had to go for lumber. During one of Brigham Young's
visits, they informed him of the seriousness of the situation and he answered
them, prophetically, "... Lumber will soar down from these cliffs like an
eagle." It was many years, however, before his promise was fulfilled but many
people who heard this statement witnessed just that very thing when a cable was
installed at the rim of Cable Mountain in Zion Canyon and brought to the floor
of the canyon for the purpose of supplying lumber to those people. The idea was
conceived by David Flanigan and the cable was in constant use for years, being
the means of getting many hundreds of thousands of feet of lumber off those
mountains. The cable had a single span of about 2,600 feet and was considered
for years one of the most interesting historical relics in Washington county.
As years went on and decay destroyed the timbers supporting the cable, it was
thought wise to do away with it. However, a lumber mill is still in operation
on the same mountains, being operated and owned by David Lemon. Since the large
tunnel was built during the construction of the Zion-Mt. Carmel Highway, the
lumber can be trucked directly from the mill.

Heart Throbs of the West, Kate B. Carter, Vol.5, p.10

Enoch, Iron County. Was settled in 1851 and received its present name in 1884
because some of the settlers were living under the "Order of Enoch" (the United
Order). It was first called Elk Horn Springs, and later renamed Johnson's
Settlement for Joel E. Johnson, early settler.

Heart Throbs of the West, Kate B. Carter, Vol.5, p.150

This issue also carries a report from Harpers, an editorial by Joel E. Johnson,
and this is very interesting.

The theme of the Gardener's Club, which was always imprinted on their
gold-lettered stationery, heads the front page of the issue and reads:

    "To till the soil,
    To prune the spreading vine;
    To raise the olive---
    Press the gushing wine;
    That fruits most luscious,
    Roots and rarest flowers
    May bless our homes
    And beautify our bowers.
    That be our aim, and this our recompense,
    We'll dig and prune by Science and by sense.

    J.E.J.

Heart Throbs of the West, Kate B. Carter, Vol.5, p.172-174

### An Early Winter

I was the son of a pioneer. Generations back my father's father's father plowed
with ox teams the fertile streets of Chicago and farmed them.

No wonder the winter of 1880 found me well housed on a bleak desolate waste
near the old Sevier River in Utah. Well housed we were, in a string of six log
cabins freshly daubed with mud and a six-inch covering of earth on the roof.
But we were content, for no one in the little town had better. The winters were
cold and long, so like the ant and the bee, we were expected to prepare for
winter with well filled larder. The threshing was done and the golden grain was
in the bin and we were waiting for a lull in fall work, to haul the grist to
the mill, ten miles away. The power to run the mill was generated from water
taken from the river, therefore all grinding must be done before winter set in.
Our butter and cheese was made in the summer and laid away in safe casks for
winter use. From Dixie came a barrel of molasses and some sun-dried fruit, for
which we had traded lumber, wheat, potatoes, or something raised in the higher
altitude. An ox or a cow and two hogs was our meat supply for the winter and
well into the spring.

The family consisted of something like fifteen in number and each member was
expected to have a daily task to perform.

The winter of 1879-80 is one long to be remembered by all who lived on the old
Sevier. As the fall of '79 found us unprepared for the winter, with 3 feet of
snow covering the ground early in November, two months earlier than we had ever
known before. Along with this early snow, it turned intensely cold, freezing up
the grist mill, also most of our vegetable supply. I remember well the jingle
of the frozen spuds as we threw them in the pot to be boiled. Then there was
the grind, grind, grind of the coffee mill as we took turns at the crank to
make our flour. I was only a boy of ten and I am sure that the crank put
muscles in my arm. I did some complaining on the side, but my mother consoled
me with "Suppose we did not have the mill or grain."

We had our barrel of molasses, so our chaff laden bread was made sweet with a
gentle swab, or perhaps the chaffy gems were bedecked with freshly made gravy
flavored from the home-cured bacon.

In those days we ate to live. From a diet of frozen potatoes, bacon grease, and
boiled wheat we were brawny and life was sweet.

At the old log schoolhouse we would gather for a drama, a dance, or a spelling
contest. All were supposed to take part. The older people staged short plays
while the younger ones came out in song or dialogue and the little tots gave us
"Little Robert Reed" or "There Came to My Window One Morning in Spring," or
something equally as appropriate. At the spelling contest two leaders were
chosen and they would choose their sides and the contest began. The side that
spelled the most words correctly was the winner.

The same old log schoolhouse was used for church as well as the dance. In one
end there was a large fireplace where the smoke and blaze roared up the chimney
and the weird light from the pitch pine logs cast a glow across the rough pine
floor, while the tallow candles on the wall would seem to wink at the
characters that would be classed as masqueraders in this day. Our pants and
shirts were often bedecked with buckskin, and on our necks was a bandana,
loosely tied. Old Criss would saw on his fiddle and we would grab and swing
"The Girl I Left Behind Me," who was all dressed up in linsey with a white
collar crocheted by mother. The prompter calls "Balance All" and the
hobble-de-hoy lad shakes his hob-nailed shoes before his lass. "Swing," calls
the prompter, and around her waist with a bearish hug he takes his lady and
around and round they go like a new red top. If the muscles of the older people
were stiffened with toil they could limber them up by parading in the Money
Musk, or Upper Gent and Lower Lady. But all must take part, as the fiddler was
already paid with carrots, spuds, or grain. The lad that would be kind to his
partner would dig deep into his pocket for a handful of parched corn or a waxy
stick of molasses candy. This treat may have had a sweaty taste; I think it
did, but in those days we digested germs and microbes as readily as we did
frozen potatoes or the shin bone of our old work-ox.

After the ball we trudged through deep snow to our warm cabins.

Night and morning on bended knees our Father would pray, "Give us this day our
daily bread," but before the stars quit shining in the morning you could hear
the grist passing through the coffee mill. Yes, God gave it to us, but it was
in a rough form. We were pioneers and our backs were fitted for the burden.

Spring came and all nature seemed to take on new life. We had one cow and yoke
of oxen left. The bones of our herd lay bleaching in the warm spring sun. As we
took on new life we would try to forget our faithful cow or ox, and with new
energy we prepared for another crop.

Fifty winters have come and gone since then. One-half of a century has made
deep wrinkles on my brow, and frosted my scanty locks, but it seems but a day
since I sat in that old cabin home. There were newspapers pasted on the walls,
a home-made rag carpet on the floor. In the corner stood an old organ, on its
stool sat my mother. She sang as she played, "Be It Ever So Humble, There's No
Place Like Home." I have listened to the chimes of the mighty pipe organ; I
have sat, with bowed head, in temples of stone where the artists of music
rehearsed Beethoven's symphonies, but God grant that the echoes of that sweet
voice in my rustic home may vibrate against my tombstone till Gabriel's trumpet
calls.

Away out where the majestic vermillion pinnacle of Bryce Canyon points to the
stars---where the flood waters have dug deep arroyas on its way to the Silver
Colorado---where the upheavals of nature have tipped the mountain tops---in a
rough and rugged land where the Cliff Dweller lived and died---there are two
graves. The place is desolate and the sun and wind blown sand wither the fresh
laid flowers, but They, Father and Mother, loved the spot because it was new.

THE LAND OF THE PIONEER.

---Joel H. Johnson.

Treasures of Pioneer History --- Vol. 1, p.403

The Door Knob

Taken from biography of Richard S. Robinson

"The pinching life of the pioneer made Richard very careful of his means and
his expenditures. He came to the store one day and asked Joel Johnson for a
cheap door lock. Joel put down a half dozen locks on the counter. Brother
Robinson looked them over and said, 'Haven't you one with a white knob, Joel?'
Joel burst out laughing and said, 'What's the difference, Bishop, whether it's
white \[p.404\] or black, if it opens the door and is only costing you
thirty-five cents ?' Brother Robinson tucked his money back in his vest pocket
and replied, 'Well, I'll go down to Bowman's and see if they have one with a
white knob, for if I should break it, it would make a good nest egg for the old
hen to lay to,' and he left to find a door knob with a white handle."

Treasures of Pioneer History, Vol.4, p.358

On many occasions the Indians were employed by the Mormon settlers and paid for
their work. Joel H. Johnson writing to the Deseret News from Elk Horn Springs
in Iron County, January 25, 1853 said he had employed seven Piede Indians to
assist in tending the herd and doing chores about the house. He testified they
were faithful to their trust.

An Enduring Legacy, Volume Four, p.273

Things looked dark for me \[Johanne Bolette (Lette) Dalley\], but I succeeded in
securing a room from a lady who took care of me during my confinement, a Mrs.
Elsworth. When my little daughter, whom I named Eliza, was three weeks old, I
knew I must get work somewhere. I did not know which way to turn, nor what to
do. No one wanted a woman with a baby to tend. A man named Joel H. Johnson, a
relative of Sister Babbitt, was leaving Salt Lake City for Fort Johnson near
Cedar Fort, Iron County. He wanted to marry me but I couldn't consent. He
promised to take me south with him and if I did not want to marry him when we
became better acquainted, he would take me to Sanpete where my Uncle John
Larsen had gone. We started; there were other teams in the company, but just
myself and baby with him in his wagon. I couldn't talk to him because I
couldn't talk much English, and more than that, had no desire to talk to him. I
never would have consented to ride with him had I not been in such desperate
circumstances.

An Enduring Legacy, Volume Five, p.331-332

Johnson---Joel Hills Johnson wrote in his journal about the settlement of this
town:

Pioneer schoolhouse, Johnson, Utah.

On January 23, 1871, I was in the home of Brigham Young in St. George.
President Young suggested that the Johnson family take over what was called
Spring Canyon Ranch twelve miles north of Kanab for a stock ranch.

I started for home and arrived late in the evening having previously made
arrangements to meet my brothers and some others at Virgin City on our way out
to look at the ranch. Accordingly we went and found a beautiful canyon half a
mile wide and several miles long covered with grass, with small springs coming
out at the foot of the bluffs on each side and plenty of building rock and fire
wood.

The family began moving into the area in March. As Johnson became very
productive and other families moved in, the place soon became a town.

A brick schoolhouse was built. It was also used for church as well as social
gatherings. From the time of the settlement until August 7, 1877, Sixtus Ellis
Johnson, son of Joel Hills Johnson, presided over the branch. He was later made
bishop.

By June 1901, only a few families remained in Johnson, and in 1959 only a few
ranches were scattered through the canyon.

An Enduring Legacy, Volume Five, p.392

Bellevue---Known as the gateway to the south, this community was famous in the
early days as the "Great Campground." It was a day's traveling distance from
Cedar City or the southern settlements. An early school was held by Joel
Johnson in his own home, with James C. Snow as teacher.

An Enduring Legacy, Volume Six, p.78-82

Joel H. Johnson

Joel was a man of numerous capabilities. He was a farmer, inventor, missionary,
legislator, composer and was called upon to direct the establishment of new
settlements. He writes:

My father, Ezekiel Johnson, was born at Uxbridge, Massachusetts, January 12,
1776. My mother's name was Julia Hills, born at Upton, Massachusetts, September
26, 1783. They were married at Grafton, Massachusetts, March 23, 1802. When I
was a small child, my parents emigrated to the state of Vermont where they
lived about nine years, and in the year of 1813 my parents let me go with my
Uncle Joel Hills, for whom I was named, to Newport in the state of Kentucky...

In the spring of 1815, my father came and took me to Pomphret, Chautauqua
County, New York, where I lived until I was twenty-one years of age, March 23,
1823. I had little or no opportunity for education, but was very religious from
a small child, not daring to transgress the will of my parents, or to do the
least thing I thought to be wrong. I always attended religious meetings and
studied my books by firelight, after I had done my work.

I bought a sawmill, and a lot of land and built a house, and my sisters kept
house for me until November 2, 1826, when I married Miss Anna P. Johnson,
daughter of Timothy Johnson, Esq. She was born August 7, 1800.

In the year 1829, I invented and patented a shingle cutter or machine used for
rooking or cutting shingles throughout the United States and Canada. The patent
is dated December 8, 1829, and signed by Andrew Jackson, president, and Martin
Van Buren, Vice President of the United States.

In the fall of 1830, I moved my family to the town of Amherst, Ohio. There I
became acquainted with the Book of Mormon and elders of The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, and was baptized into the Church on the first day
of June 1831, and was ordained an elder on September 20, following. I was then
appointed to preside over the Amherst Branch which numbered about one hundred
members.

I attended the first October conference of the Church which was held in Orange
Township, Ohio, in 1831. It was here I first beheld the face of the Prophet
Joseph and heard the words of life from his mouth, which filled my heart with
joy and thanks to God.

In January 1832, I went on a mission to the state of New York, preaching the
gospel. I visited my father's family in Pomphret. They willingly heard and
believed, and my mother and some others were baptized. On my return home I
baptized many in and about Amherst and ordained several elders and priests. In
July 1833, President Smith counselled me to move to Kirtland and buy out a
certain individual, which I did...

I was there when the foundation of the temple was laid, and I built a sawmill
for its benefit. I was present at the calling and ordination of the first
Twelve Apostles. Also at the calling and ordination of all the different
quorums of the Church. I attended the dedication of the Lord's House on the
27th of March, 1836, and all the meetings and councils that followed. I saw and
heard the power of God manifested as mentioned in the life of Joseph Smith and
was chosen a member of the Quorum of Seventies; went on several missions, etc.

I helped to organize the Zion's Camp in 1838, and traveled with it as far as
Springfield, Illinois; was called by the council to stop there and take care of
the sick. I commenced preaching and soon gathered a branch of the Church of
forty members, over which I presided until January 8, 1839, when the Lord
showed by revelation that I must immediately go to Carthage in Hancock County.
I packed up and went with my family and commended preaching in Carthage and
vicinity. I baptized many, and organized a branch of the Church of about fifty
members, called the Crooked Creek Branch...

In February 1840, I purchased a sawmill and a piece of land on Crooked Creek
onto which I moved my family. In July we, as a branch of the Church, were
organized into a stake of Zion with all of its officers and quorums. I was
ordained high priest and president of the stake under the hands of Hyrum Smith.
A town was laid out and built up by the Saints. On September 11, 1840, my wife
Anna died and left me with five small children. On October 20 following, I
married Susan Bryant. In the winter of 1842, President Smith and the council
thought best to disorganize the stake because of a secretly organized band of
false brethren who had crept in amongst us, and I was honorably discharged from
further duties as president.

I was eight miles from Carthage on the memorable June 27, 1844, when Hyrum and
Joseph Smith were slain in Carthage Jail. On the 13th of November following, I
was appointed to preside over a small branch of the Church called the Pleasant
Vale Brach. October 25, 1845, I took to wife Miss Janet Fife, a Scottish lady.
On December 31, my wife Susan and I received our endowments in the Lord's House
in Nauvoo.

May 1, 1846, about two o'clock at night, I was called to the door by an armed
mob of about one hundred men, who had surrounded my house and asked me if I
were preparing to leave. I told them that I was. They told me that if I was not
gone by the first day of June, my life would be taken and my property
destroyed. After more threats they went away.

Out of four or five thousand dollars' worth of property that I owned in Hancock
County, all that I could raise to help me away was one horse team worth only
seventy-five dollars, one yoke of oxen and a borrowed wagon. On the last day of
May, I loaded my family into the wagon, leaving everything else behind, and
started for Knox County, Illinois, where I had claims on an eighty-acre
soldier-right-of-land. We arrived there on the 4th day of June, 1846.

While in Knox County the Lord blessed me with means in a wonderful manner, so
that by the 6th day of May, 1848, I was able to start for Salt Lake Valley with
three wagons and sufficient teams well loaded with family necessities,
provisions, tools etc. With a few calves and sheep, we arrived at Winter
Quarters on the Missouri River the first week in June. We tarried four weeks
waiting for company, and started on July 5th in Willard Richard's camp. We
arrived in the Valley on October 19, 1848.

I stopped at the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon and was ordained bishop of Mill
Creek Ward, and elected justice of the peace and member of the legislature of
Deseret for 1849 and 1850. In the fall of 1850, I was elected to assist George
A. Smith in forming a settlement at Little Salt Lake, now Parowan, Iron County,
Utah.

I sent with Brother Smith my two oldest sons with two teams laden with
provisions: seed, farming tools, iron mill saws, etc. In the spring I went down
with stock and several more teams laden with necessaries for a new settlement.
At the organization of the city of Parowan, county court and high council, I
was elected a member of the city council, selectman and one of the high
council. November 19, 1851, I was sent by George A. Smith to the spring twelve
miles south of Parowan and near Cedar City. The same is still called Fort
Johnson.

In the fall of 1855, I attended the Second Judicial District Court at Fillmore,
Utah, as petty juror. December 10 the legislature assembly convened in the
State House at Fillmore and I was elected chaplain of the House, which office I
filled during the session.

In the spring of 1857, I was called on a mission to the States, started April
6, and arrived at Florence June 13, returning to Salt Lake City again October
5, 1860. On the 11th I went President Young's office and had Miss Margaret
Threlkeld, an English lady, sealed to me by the President. We arrived home in
Iron County October 29, I being absent from home over three years. My labors
were mostly in preaching to the people over Iowa, and presiding at the Genoa
Branch in Nebraska.

I moved my family down to Virgin City in the fall of 1861. I was then sent by
President Erastus Snow up North Creek about six miles to build a sawmill, which
I accomplished. I also planted out large orchards and vineyards, and made many
other improvements. In July 1866, I sold out on North Creek and moved back to
Virgin City and on March 1, 1868, we moved to Bellevue, my present place of
residence...

I have written nearly one thousand spiritual hymns and sacred songs now in
manuscript entitled, "Zion's Songster," or the "Songs of Joel," a few of which
have been published in the Church works. In this short sketch of my life I have
mentioned but a very few of my labors and travels in the Kingdom...

### JOEL'S SONGS OF PRAISE

Joel Hills Johnson selected 360 "Hymns of Praise" from his "Songs of Joel" and
had them printed in a pocket-size booklet which he dedicated to the youth of
Zion. Among the subjects he included were those in praise of God, prayer, love,
Christ's second coming, the Millennium and many other themes suitable to teach
the goodness and love of God to his earthly children. Since few of these sacred
hymns are available for reading by the present-day youth of Zion, one of the
poems has been included in this lesson, together with his own life story and
the foreword to his "Hymns of Praise," which follows:

Most of the hymns in this volume have been written under very trying
circumstances. The spirit that indited them would sometimes rest so powerfully
upon the author that his sleep would depart from him.

At these times, the words of John the Revelator, when on the Isle of Patmos,
would often be impressed on his mind---and he said unto me, write."

In this book he has sought, in all simplicity, to teach the pure principles of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

It is his testimony, last of all, to the sons and daughters of Zion, and to the
world, of the fulness of the Gospel of Christ, and of the building up of Zion
in these latter-days through the ministrations of the Prophet Joseph Smith,
Jun.

The words of the book are true and faithful, being dictated by the Holy Spirit
of Promise, and they will all be fulfilled.

I humbly dedicate this book to the youth of Zion.

### HYMN 168

    Like souls upon a dreary waste,
    Whose tongues are dried with thirst,
    With longing appetites to taste
    Where cooling waters burst;

    So thirsts my soul to know my God,
    And feel his Spirit's pow'r,
    To guide me through life's desert road,
    And bless each passing hour.

    So longs my heart the time to come,
    When, free from toil and pain,
    I shall to my primeval home,
    With joy, return again.

    Then, Father, grant thy love and grace
    That I may faithful prove,
    And see again thy glorious face,
    In worlds of light and love.

Joel H. Johnson moved his family from Bellevue to to Johnson in October 1880.
He died there in the eighty-second year of his life, 1882. He was the father of
twenty-four children and his three oldest sons were ordained patriarchs, as he
had been.

An Enduring Legacy, Volume Ten, p.408-409

Joel Hills Johnson, another great colonizer, was born January 12, 1802, at
Uxbridge, Massachusetts. As a boy he lived in Vermont, Kentucky, and New York.
He invented and patented a machine for cutting shingles that was used
throughout the United States.

In the fall of 1830 he moved his family to Amherst, Ohio, where he met some
elders of the LDS Church. Joel was baptized in June, 1831. He was a special
friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith and was with him when the Word of Wisdom was
revealed.

Joel came to Utah in October, 1848, and located at the north of Millcreek
Canyon, where he served as bishop of that ward, as justice of the peace, and as
a member of the legislature of the State of Deseret in 1848-50.

He was called to the Iron County Mission in the fall of 1850, and sent his two
older sons with outfits loaded with farming tools, seeds, and an iron mill saw.
Joel Johnson came in the spring of 1851 with his family and cattle.

He went farther southwest with a group that was exploring the country, and when
they came to the green, grassy meadows at what was to become Enoch, he put out
his arms and said, "Mine, all mine."

In the summer of 1851 Joel was called by George A. Smith to take his family to
a nearby area and build a big stockade to help take care of the cattle from
both Parowan and Cedar. It was and Cedar to the protection of the forts. They
returned to Johnson's Spring the last of May, 1854.

In the summer of 1852, James Dalley and his wife, Emma Wright, William Dalley
and wife, Mandana Hillman, Labon Morrell and wife, Permelia H. Drury, left
Council Bluffs by ox team in Daniel McArthur's company and arrived in Utah
October 24, 1852. The Dalley brothers settled in Pleasant Grove and Labon
Morrell in Springville. President Young called Labon Morrell to the Iron County
Mission and he persuaded him to call the Dalley brothers. Afar arriving in
Cedar City in 1854, they were sent to help build the fort at Johnson's Spring.
Thomas P Smith and James W. Bay were also called to help erect the fort. Other
settlers came later in 1854 and helped in the building of the fort. It was
built about one-quarter mile west of the bench where Joel H. Johnson first
settled.

\[1\]Susan Ellen Johnson, Autobiography, typescript, BYU. Grammar has been
standardized.

## A grand daughter remembers Joel H. Johnson and Annie Pixley Johnson

    ANCESTRAL SKETCHES AND MEMOIRS OF MARY JULIA JOHNSON WILSON
    \[ABOUT JOEL HILLS JOHNSON (1802-1888) AND
    ANNIE PIXLEY JOHNSON (1800-1840)\]
    OF HILLSDALE, GARFIELD COUNTY, UTAH

Source: Ancestral sketches and memoirs of Mary Julia Johnson Wilson, microfiflm
of typescript, BYU.

My Grandfather, Joel Hills Johnson, was the eldest son of Ezekial and Julia
Hills Johnson and was born in Grafton, Worcester County, Massachusetts, March
23rd, 1802. When he was a small child his parents moved to the state of Vermont
where they resided for about nine years. In the year 1813 they permitted
Grandfather to go with his Uncle Joel Hills, (for whom he was named) to the
town of Newport, Kentucky, on the Ohio River opposite the town of Cincinnati.
Here he remained for two years till his father came and took him to Pompret,
Chautauqua County, New York, where the family had moved during his absence.
Here he lived with them until he was twenty-one years of age, or until March
23rd, 1823.

He had little or no opportunity for education, but from a small child was given
strict religious training by his mother, and was taught never to transgress the
will of his parents or do the least thing which he thought to be wrong, and
always to attend religious services. What studying he did was done by firelight
after working hard all day.

After leaving home he bought a small tract of land on which he built a house
and his sisters came and kept house for him. He also bought a sawmill which he
operated to earn a living. His sisters remained with him until November 2nd,
1826, when he married Annie Pixley Johnson, and brought her to his home.

Annie Pixley Johnson was the daughter of Dennis Welch and Timothy Johnson,
Esquire, although thus far we are unable to connect these Johnsons with our
family, until the marriage of these grandparents.

Great grandfather Johnson, father of Annie Pixley Johnson, was born in Harver
Hill, Essex County, Massachusetts, May 22nd, 1768, and died in 1845.
Grandmother was born at Canaan, Grafton, New Hampshire, August 8th, 1800. Thus
far we have been able to find nothing definite concerning her childhood or her
life prior to her marriage to Grandfather Joel Hills Johnson as stated November
2nd, 1826. Nor do we know of their acquaintance or courtship. To them were born
the following five children: Sariah, Sixtus, Nephi, Susan and Seth. She died
September 10th, 1840, when her youngest son, Seth, who became my father, was a
little less than two years of age.

In the year 1829, Grandfather Joel Hills Johnson invented and patented the
shingle cutter machine now used for making or cutting shingles for many, many
years throughout the United States and Canada. The patent is dated the 8th of
December 1829, and is signed by Andrew Jackson, President, and by Martin Van
Buren Vice-President of the United States.

In the fall of 1830 Grandfather moved his family to the town of Amherst, Lorain
County, State of Ohio. He first became acquainted with the Elders of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and with the Book of Mormon, and at once
became a convert of this new faith, being baptized into the Church June lst,
1831, and was ordained and made an Elder on the 20th of September following,
and was appointed to preside over the Amherst Branch of the Church, then
numbering about one hundred members.

Grandfather Johnson attended the first October Conference ever held by the
Mormon Church. It was held in Orange Township, Ohio, in 1831. It was on this
occasion he first beheld the face of the Prophet Joseph Smith and heard the
"words of life" direct from his mouth, which he writes, "filled his heart with
joy and thanks to God." In January 1832 he went on a mission to the state of
New York, visiting the home of his father's family in Pompret, and preaching
the gospel to them. This they willingly heard and his mother and others of the
family were baptized. He continued his mission labors when he returned to
Amherst baptizing many in and about that place and ordaining several Elders and
Priests.

In July 1833, following the counsel of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he moved his
family to Kirtland, Ohio, buying out annoying individuals. Thus he was in
Kirtland to see the laying of the foundation of the Kirtland Temple, and
erected a saw mill to provide some of the lumber for this building.

Beginning August 26th, 1835, he filled a short mission throughout the
south-east part of the state of Ohio, preaching in many cities and towns, and
baptizing several new members before returning home. Then he continued to
proselyte and perform missionary labors in the vicinity of Kirtland, baptizing
many and ordaining Elders, and receiving a blessing under the hands of the
First Presidency of the Church for his labors in preaching and in assisting to
build the Lord's house. He was present at the calling and ordination of all the
different quorums of the Church, and attended the dedication of the "Lord's
House" (Kirtland Temple) March 27th, 1837, and all of the meetings and councils
that followed, saw and heard the power of God made manifest as written in the
Life of Joseph Smith, and was chosen a member of the Quorum of Seventies
appointed at that time, filling several missions under this calling.

Grandfather Joel Hills Johnson helped to organize the Kirtland Camp in 1838,
traveling with it as far as Springfield, Illinois, remaining there by call to
take care of the sick. He commenced preaching there and soon assembled a branch
of the Mormon Church numbering forty members over which he presided until
January 8th, 1839, going from there directly to Carthage, Hancock County,
following what to him was a direct revelation. Reaching Carthage, he at once
began preaching in that vicinity, baptizing many and organizing a branch of the
Church of about fifty members known as the Crooked Creek Branch.

About this time, Sidney Rigdon, Bishop Partridge and others, who were on their
way to Commerce, Illinois, called on him. The location was made and called
Nauvoo. In February of 1840, he purchased a sawmill and a piece of land in
Crooked Creek, onto which he moved his family. In July of that year the Branch
of the Church was organized into a Stake of Zion, with all of it's officers and
quorums, grandfather being ordained a High Priest under the hands of Hyrum
Smith, brother of the Prophet. A town was laid out and built up by the Saints.
Grandfather was made president of this Stake.

Shortly after the death of Grandmother, which occurred, as stated, September
11, 1840, leaving him with the care of five small children, Grandfather
remarried, this time to a Miss Susan Bryant. Later he was released from the
Stake Presidency. He was just eight miles from Carthage when Joseph and Hyrum
Smith were Martyred, June 27, 1844, and witnessed the sorrow and commotions
that followed this event. On the 13th of the following November he was
appointed to preside over the Pleasant Vale Branch of the Church.

Under the order of plural marriage, grandfather took to wife a Miss Janet Fife,
a Scotch convert, October 25, 1845. May 1, 1846 they were visited by a mob who
served notice they must leave this part of the country by the first of June,
else their lives would be taken and property destroyed. Grandfather disposed of
his more than five thousand dollars worth of property in Hancock County for one
team of horses worth about seventy-five dollars, and one yoke of oxen, and with
a borrowed wagon, started on the last day of May for Knox County, Illinois,
arriving there on the fourth of June to occupy an eighty acre soldier land
claim. While in Knox County he was enabled to secure the means necessary for
preparing for the journey to Salt Lake City by May 6, 1848. They were provided
with plenty of teams and three wagons loaded with family necessities of food,
clothing, provisions, tools, etc., also with a few cows and sheep, and arrived
at Winter Quarters the first week in June. Here they remained for a month,
joining the Willard Richard's Company and moving forward July 5th, 1848, and
arriving in Salt Lake City on October 19th.

The home conditions tended to draw more closely together the five children of
grandmother's, the older ones getting homes of their own and caring for the
younger ones. All of them married quite young, except my father, Seth, who left
home and started to teach school when he was eighteen years of age, and
continued in this profession for close to forty years.

"The first I remember of Grandmother's children," remarked Mrs. Wilson, "was my
impressions of how these five seemed to cling together, the younger ones
depending on counsel and advice, more on their elder brothers and sisters than
on Grandfather or his young wives. I remember this particularly with regard to
my father, who was about thirteen years younger than his elder sister, Sariah.
After his older brothers and sister moved to Dixie and settled in Virgin City,
father soon married and followed them. Susan, the younger sister, married and
settled in Logan, Utah."

Uncle Sixtus filled a mission to the Sandwich Islands when he was a very young
man and father made several trips across the plains to help the emigrating
Saints on their way to Utah. Whether or not grandmother ever labored in behalf
of the church or not, I am unable to say, but their is plenty of evidence that
her five children did, and were a credit to her name as well as to their
Church. All of her children lived until after father, the youngest one was
eighty years old. They also accepted and lived the law of plural marriage, and
reared large and respectable families, the two girls having thirteen children
each.

"Reflecting on what Grandmother's life must have been," says Mrs. Wilson; "I
have written these lines in her memory."

### MY GRANDMOTHER ANNA PIXLEY JOHNSON

    A few things, I imagine, my grandmother knew,
    For she had many trials to pass through;
    Trials and the hardships of early Church life,
    For she was a church-worker's wife.

    I can imagine her when the mobs came
    And drove her and her family, the very same
    As many of the other Saints were driven
    When no mercy to any was given.

    Many times from them their all was taken
    But their faith was never shaken;
    To their Church they were always true,
    No matter what they had to pass through.

    She lived in the Church nearly ten years
    At least that is how it appears;
    Then died and left her children five;
    Until they were very old, they were all alive.

    They were all workers wherever they went,
    They were always ready to go where they were sent,
    To work in the Church was their delight;
    Whether for people who were dark or white.

    When grandmother died she left descendants behind,
    Who had their ancestors always in mind;
    In the Temple their work they would do,
    As well as doing other Church work too.

Grandfather and his three other families, including a young wife Margaret
Threlkeld of England, (whom he married in October, 1860, on their arrival at
Salt Lake City, from where he had been on a mission in Nebraska,) moved about
extensively in various parts of southern Utah, grandfather finally passing away
September 24, 1888, at the family ranch in Johnson, Kane County, Utah still
declaring his testimony to the world, and praising the Lord in song and with
all his heart.

## Newell K. Whitney Store Account Book

    Newell K. Whitney Store Account Book
    Kirtland Ohio
    November 12, 1836 - April 16, 1837

    Johnson, Joel Hills bedcord 1 $0.50
    Johnson, Joel Hills book, spelling 1 $0.13
    Johnson, Joel Hills broadcloth 1 1/4 yd. $4.38
    Johnson, Joel Hills buttons 1 doz. $0.06
    Johnson, Joel Hills moreno 4 yd. $4.25
    Johnson, Joel Hills pd. order for H. Cowdery $1.00
    Johnson, Joel Hills pd. order for H. Crary $5.00
    Johnson, Joel Hills pd. order for J. Johnston $2.50
    Johnson, Joel Hills pd. order for Moses Chaer $13.87
    Johnson, Joel Hills velvet, cotton 1/4 yd. $0.20
    Johnson, Joel Hills wadding 4 sheets $0.50
    Johnson, Joel Hills whiplash 1 $0.19

## SARIAH ANNA JOHNSON ( Daughter)

Sariah Anna Johnson was born 18 February 1332 at Amhurst, Lorain County, Ohio,
daughter of Joel hills Johnson, son of Ezekiel and Julia Hills Johnson and Anna
Pixley Johnson, daughter of Timothy Johnson and Anna Pixley

Joel Hills Johnson and Anna Pixley Johnson had four children besides the Sariah
Anna whose history is here being biven. They were Sixtus, Ellis, Nephi, Susan
Ellen, and Seth. The Mother, Anna Pixley Johnson whose name before and after
marriage was Johnson, died 11 September 1840 at Macedonia, Illinois (near
Nauvoo). After the Mothers death the Father, Joel Hills Johnson, married Susan
Bryant. They were driven around by mobs and Sariah Anna went to live with her
Grandmother Julia Hills Johnson.

Before the death of her Mother she lived in Kirtland, 0hio until she was eleven
years old, (These places are all near the city of Cleveland, Ohio ) ( Sariah
Anna was evidently only about eight years of age when her own Mother died.
Three of the children were still younger, the baby Seth, less than two years of
age. Joel Hills Johnson married Susan Bryant the same year his first wife, Anna
Pixley Johnson, died and Susan came into the home to take care of the
motherless family. She also raised a large family of her own.

The parents of Sariah Anna Johnson had joined the Church before Sariah Anna was
born. About the time Sariah Anna was eleven the Saints were all called to go to
Jackson County, Missouri. Joel Hills Johnson was a Captain of the Company. They
went as far as Springfield, Ohio and there rented a place and stayed for the
winter. fier Father and fnmily stayed in a lar;e rotel, but he 'elt impressed
to go to Carthage so in February t:e took tis family and moved to Carthage,
Illinois, Tt,ere he found many who were anxious to hear the Gospel; and tnany
yere baptized. Here her faLher ren~ed a sawmill and worked at that industry and
farmed to support his faraily.

Sariah Anna Johnaon married John Eager (Eagar) in Salt Lake City on the 1st of
July, 1849. She had come West with the Saints in 1848. She had worked in the
Nauvoo House after the martyrdom of the Prophet, Joseph Smith. Her father's
family were very intimate with the Prophet Joseph so she was well acquainted
with him, being about twelve years old at the time of his death.

John Eagar was born 13 July 1823. He was a man of education, a printer by
trade. He became acquainted with the authorities of the Church in New York City
where he assisted in printing a paper for them. He was one of those. who went
on the ship Brooklyn around to San Francisco and from there by land to Utah. He
died in Manti, Utah on the 3rd of March 1864.

    John Eagar and Sariah Anna Johnson had the following children:
    Anna Sariah Eagar
    John Thomas Eagar
    William Walter Eagar
    Julia Hills Eagar
    Joel Sixtus Eagar
    Susan Elizabeth Eagar
    Benjamin Franklin Eagar
    Mary Elvira Eagar

Sariah Anna (Johnson) Eagar and her fatherless family went to Utah's Dixie
about two weeks after the father's death. She settled in Virgin, having come
there with her brother Nephi Johnson. In two days after her arrival in Virgin,
she had a home of her own, two "dug-outs". How few of the women of today would
be proud to call such a place home. She had left a good home in Manti that had
cost them three hundred dollars to make and with her eight children had gone
pioneering in the year 1864 when every neccessity was so hard to get.

Two years later, 17 March 1866, she married Andrew Jackson Workman in Salt Lake
City, Utah. At the time of their marriage he had three children: Louisa,
Eveline, and William Manit. From their union five sons were born in Manit, Utah
as follows:

    Amos Jackson Workman 18 December 1866
    Nephi Johnson Workman 9 July 1868
    Charles Adelbert Workman 3 September 1870
    Edwin Monroe Workman 2 July 1872
    Jacob Louis Workman 18 November 1874

This made sixteen children she had to raise. She was President of the Relief
Society about twenty years in Virgin Utah and a Sunday School Teacher for nine
years, having given many years of faithful service.

They lived in Virgin until about 1908, when they moved to Hurricane, Utah.
Andrew Jackson Workman died 15 June 1909. 'Sariah lived alone, only her
grandchildren stayed with her at night. One winter Anna (Annie) Covington and
Mary (Mamie ) Hinton nursed her through her sickness. She used to love to tell
her grandchildren how she used to sit on the Prophet Joseph's lap and he would
give her blessings. She also would tell about when she was twelve years old,
how she drove a yoke of oxen across the plains in tho Willard Richards Company,
when her family came to the "Valley". She said she was at the meeting when the
mantle of the Prophet Joseph fell on Brigham Young, and her testimony of the
occasion was very strong. She bore a strong testimony of the Gospel as long as
she lived. She died 27 March 1925, and is buried in the Hurricane Cemetery.

## A Voice from the Mountains.

My Early Life

Joel Hills Johnson,Voice From the Mountains,Being A Testimony of the Truth of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ,as Revealed by the Lord to Joseph Smith, Jr.

(Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor, 1881), pp. 3-4, 12-16.

A Voice from the Mountains. My Early Life.

I was born on the 23rd of March, 1802, in the town of Grafton, state of
Massachusetts, of old Puritan or Mayflower stock.

I was so carefully instructed by a pious mother, that I dared not do anything
that would displease the Lord or my parents. As soon as I could read, she gave
me a small New Testament which I carried in my pocket. I neglected few
opportunities of studying it, and often committed some of it to memory.

My attention was early drawn to the ancient ordinances and blessings of the
Church. I believed, as far as my limited comprehension allowed, in baptism for
the remission of sins, in laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost,
and in signs following the believer, as mentioned in Mark, xvi. 17, 18. "And
these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out
devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on
the sick, and they shall recover."

I believed that the order established by Jesus and His apostles in the
primitive church was the only true one. I sought among the sects for it, but
found it not

Until the Prophet Joseph came;"Repent," to me he said,"And be baptized in
Jesus'nameWith hands laid on your head."And when I had his word obeyed,My joy
could not be told;I spoke in tongues and prophesied,As did the Saints of old.No
wish had I, nor could refuseThe power that on me fell;Light filled my soul, my
tongue was,The glorious news to tell.God then to me this truth revealed:That he
had Joseph sent;And on his head the Priesthood sealedTo call men to repent.

There appears to have been some special providences over my early life. I will
relate one which preserved it:

When about twelve years old, I was walking along the bank of the Ohio River,
and saw a company of boys in bathing.

I desired to bathe, but the boys being strangers to me, I preferred to do so
alone.

Seeing other boys wading out a considerable distance in shallow water, I did
not for a moment doubt but what I could do so in safety.

Before proceeding far, however, I suddenly stepped off a steep bank into water
over my head.

Not being able to swim, after struggling awhile, I went to the bottom.

I lay there perfectly helpless, and supposed that my time had come to leave
this world.

Suddenly a strange power came over me. Something said, "Turn over on your face,
and crawl on the ground." I made the effort, and, without knowing which way I
was going, got out of the water.

The same power impressed me to crawl to a little knoll nearby, and get my
stomach on it, with my head down. Succeeding in doing so, I became insensible
for a time. When I came to my senses again, much water had run out of my mouth,
my blood had begun to circulate, and I was in much distress but I recovered. .
. .

###The Word of Wisdom

I was with Joseph Smith, the Prophet, when the Word of Wisdom was given by
revelation from the Lord \[D&C 89\], February 27, 1833, and, I think, I am the
only man now living who was present.

I was then thirty one years of age, and had used tobacco somewhat extravagantly
for fifteen years. I always used some strong drink, and tea and coffee.

I knew that God had spoken and condemned the use of these things, and, being
determined to live by every word that proceeded from His mouth, I laid them all
aside, and have not used them since.

I well remember that, soon after the publication of the Word of Wisdom, the
same excuse was made, by some of the people, for drinking tea and coffee that
is now made--that hot drinks did not mean tea and coffee.

On a Sabbath day, in the July following the giving of the revelation, when both
Joseph and Hyrum Smith were in the stand, the Prophet said to the Saints:

"I understand that some of the people are excusing themselves in using tea and
coffee, because the Lord only said `hot drinks' in the revelation of the Word
of Wisdom.  
"The Lord was showing us what was good for man to eat and drink. Now, what do
we drink when we take our meals?  
"Tea and coffee. Is it not?  
"Yes; tea and coffee.  
"Then, they are what the Lord meant when He said `hot drinks.'"

Brother Hyrum Smith spoke to the same effect.  
It is said all wholesome herbs are ordained for the use of man. Physicians tell
us that tea and coffee are not wholesome. And the Lord says they are not for
the body or the belly.

When children see that their parents slight the Word of Wisdom, they are apt to
follow their example.

I have recorded this testimony that all who read it may be without excuse. How
pleasant it would be at last, if we could say to our Heavenly Father, "I have
obeyed all your counsels," and hear these kind words in return: "Well done!
thou hast been faithful over a few things, be thou ruler over many."

Character of Joseph Smith, Jr.

I became acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jr., at the October conference held by
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, October 6, 1831.

I was with him, more or less, in public, in private, in council and in all the
associations of life.

I had many business transactions with him.

This intercourse continued about thirteen years, and it gave me, probably, as
good an opportunity to understand his character, as was had by any man now
living. I was often present when the word of the Lord came from His mouth, and
was written down by his scribe.

I knew, and now know, that it was the word of the Lord to all men, whether they
receive it or not.

He was a man of sterling worth.

He was naturally affectionate and kind.

His reputation was good among all who were acquainted with him; but among those
who knew him not, his name was cast out as evil.

Like many of the ancient Saints, his life was sought from the time he announced
to the world that the Lord had spoken to him.

"Thus saith the Lord," has never been received by any people, except saints,
with pleasure.

The Jews, in the days of our Savior, believed that they held the oracles of the
living God, and were the only people that He acknowledged. They made long
prayers in the temple, in their houses and at the corners of the streets. They
paid tithes of all they had, even to mint and rue, and kept holy the Sabbath
day; yet they rejected their Savior and King, and cried, "Away with Him, away
with Him, crucify Him!"

When, to bring in the dispensation of the fullness of times for the gathering
of Israel, God sent His Prophet, Joseph Smith, to preach to this nation
repentance, the cry was quickly raised in the land, "Away with him, kill him!
kill him!"

His enemies had him before the courts some forty times. Some of these trials I
attended. His enemies sought far and near to find false witnesses against him,
as did the enemies of our Savior, but they could not find the least evil in
him.

When he and his brother Hyrum were on the way to Carthage, as it proved for the
final sacrifice, he said to those with him, "I am going like a lamb to the
slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of
offense towards God, and towards all men. I SHALL DIE INNOCENT, AND IT SHALL
YET BE SAID OF ME--HE WAS MURDERED IN COLD BLOOD."

They had lived above the law and a mob was brought into requisition to take
their lives.

"Crown him then!" the Saints are crying.He a glorious work has done;And the
heavenly hosts replying(With the Savior he is one):"Crown him gladly;Crown him,
Father, through Thy Son."Lo! the day of coronation!What celestial joy it
brings!Now he takes a higher station,While the heavenly world thus
sings,"Crowned by Jesus!Lord of lords and King of kings."

During the persecutions of the Saints, the Lord, through His Prophet Joseph,
commanded them to seek redress for their wrongs, first "At the feet of the
judge, and if he heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the governor,
and if he heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the president, and
if he heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come out of His hiding place
and in His fury vex the nation."

These pleadings were attended to, but they brought no redress for the Saints.

In a letter to John C. Calhoun, of South Carolina, dated January 2nd, 1844, the
Prophet Joseph makes these forcible predictions. Let them "Raise the hue and
cry of imposter, false Prophet, G---D---old Joe Smith; yet, remember, if the
Latter-day Saints are not restored to all their rights, and paid for all their
losses, according to the known rules of justice and judgment, and reciprocation
and common honesty among men, that God will come out of his hiding place and
vex this nation with a sore vexation--yea, the consuming wrath of an offended
God shall smoke through the nation, with as much distress and woe, as
independence has blazed through with pleasure and delight."

I could refer to several predictions from the mouth of the Prophet on the same
subject, which were literally fulfilled in the war of the great rebellion, but
these are a testimony to the nation that Joseph Smith, Jun., was a Prophet of
God.

If the Saints are deprived of their rights, as American citizens by special
legislation of Congress as recommended by Presidents Hayes and Garfield, soon
the wrath of God will fall upon this nation with four-fold greater vengeance,
than in the war of the great rebellion.

It will then not only be the North against the South, but party against party,
neighbor against neighbor, brother against brother, father against sons and
sons against fathers, and blood shall flow, until the land is desolate and but
few men left.

These words are true and faithful, because dictated by the Holy Ghost. They
will stand unshaken at the day of accounts, whether received by the great men
of the nation and the multitude or not.

Lines Dedicated to the Prophet, Joseph Smith, Jr.

Thou servant of the living God,Like thee I've sought among the sects,To find a
few that have not trodThe path His holy law rejects.With thee, His Seer, I've
found at last,The keeper of my Father's house.My lot, and all, with thee I
cast,To solemnize my youthful vows.For thou art chosen of the Lord,To gather up
the pure and wise;With Priesthood power as thy reward,His Church again to
organize.Alone no longer can I roam;My heart is with the pure and brave;With
thee and thine I'll find my home,Myself and all my kin to save.Thy holy cause I
will defend,While all thy sorrows, joys, and care,Shall be my own, till life
shall end,With Thee eternal life to share.

* * *

* 13 Oct 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown)
  by Daniel Esplin. This was originally a series of blog posts by "The Binks
  Family" on <http://ilovefamilyhistory31.blogspot.com>
