# William Perkins and Jane Mathews

In 1807 Sketty, situated to the WSW of Swansea, was a cluster of farms
bordering on the suburbs of this industrial port. Today it forms part of
Swansea proper. It was here on 16 February 1807 that William, son of Thomas
Pergrin and Ann Evans, was born.[^1]

Thomas and Ann were not married, however, and it was apparently decided by them
that Thomas would take care of the child. Ann later married John Jenkins and
had one child. The year following William's birth, Thomas married Ann Mathews,
daughter of Joseph Mathews and Margaret Beddow.[^2] This marriage proved to be
a happy one. Ann accepted the child of her husband as though he were her own
and loved him as her own throughout her life.

The Pergrin family belonged to the Independent Church at Swansea, but no record
has been preserved of them there. We, therefore, have to rely on our family
records for most of our information about them during this period of their
lives.

In his daily activities, William was a collier, or a coal miner. The colliery
of Treboeth to the north of Swansea provided him with his living. Here he
worked with many boys and men from the Mathews family that also lived in
Treboeth. Through them he became acquainted with Jane Mathews and in those
brief hours in the evenings after work was done they began courting. Jane was
the daughter of Thomas Mathews and Mary Davis. She was born 28 May 1814 at
Treboeth.[^3] They were married at Llangyfelach on 6 July 1833. She was 19 and
he 25.[^4]

The first ten years of their married life were uneventful. William spent his
days in the coal mines and Jane at home tending to their ever-increasing
family. Their home was on Penllwin Robert Street in St. John's parish in the
confines of the Treboeth colliery. Their parents all lived within the same area
also.

The first children were all born at their home on Penllwin Robert with the
possible exception of the eldest who may have been born at Llangyfelach.[^5]
Their names and births are as follows.

    Thomas         b. 19 May 1834 
    John           b. 4 Sep 1835 
    Mary           b. 29 July 1837 
    William        b. 23 Nov 1838 d. 14 Feb 1839 
    Joseph Mathews b. 20 May 1840

According to our family records, little William, who died at age two and
one-half months, died at Berid at Minglebach near Llangyfelach.

The first census of any genealogical value in Wales was that taken on the night
of 7 June 1841. The information recorded includes the names of every person in
each house the night the census was taken, together with the names of those
persons who were engaged in their regular labor during the night and would
return home the next morning. In this census it was the rule to record the ages
of persons fifteen years or younger correctly, but for persons fifteen years of
age or older, the last term of fiver years in which their age fell was to be
recorded.[^6]

Our Pergrin family was living on Penllwin Robert Street in Treboeth or as the
area is described generally in the census "All the houses from Penllwin March
farm on the north to the Pottery Mill on the south, from Penllwin Brook on the
west to the road leading from Swansea to the Plough and Harrow on the east."

The family is given as follows:[^7]

    William Pergrin age 30 Collier born in Glam.  
    Jane      "      "  25          "       " 
    Thomas    "      "   7          "       " 
    John      "      "   6          "       " 
    Mary      "      "   4          "       " 
    Joseph    "      "  12 mo.      "       "

The next year another girl was born to William and Jane. They named her Ann.
She was born 14 May 1842 at the home on Penllwin Robert Street.[^8]

At about this time Mormon Elders came into the area, and began preaching a new
and controversial doctrine. They caused much confusion among the established
churches, and persecution rapidly followed the believers.

Our ancestor, Benjamin Perkins, was born during this critical period in the
lives of our forefathers. He was born 14 January 1844 according to his own word
"in a little town named Schoot, about two miles east of Swansea." It is the
author's opinion, however, that the family remained at Penllwin Robert during
this time.

William and Jane were baptized and confirmed by Elder Abel Evans into the
Mormon Church and became members of the Treboeth Branch on 23 October 1844.[^9]
Thomas and John, the two older children did not accept this new doctrine at the
time, but were baptized in 1847 and 1848 respectively. The other children were
too young to be baptized with their parents. William's father was baptized at
the same time as his son, and his step-mother one month later. Jane's mother
was baptized the following year. Her father did not accept the gospel.

From the time of their acceptance of this new faith, the Pergrin family had a
very hard time. The influence of his over-pious Methodist associates was
brought to bear so forcibly upon him that he was forced to surrender his
position at the colliery. After several years of meager existence, consisting
of much destitution and suffering, the family was forced to enter a national
poor house.

On 15 August 1845 Jane gave birth to her eighth child, named David. Our family
records, handed down from these forebearers, show that he was born at
Llangyfelach and died two years later, on 15 September 1847, at Pant Ridyfew.

In the poor house, the family was separated, the children being placed in one
area, and the parents in another. Their habitations were big flag-floored rooms
where everyone was bunched together. There was no heat, and the food just
sufficient to maintain health. Not even the beauties of the outside world were
allowed to cheer their dismal existence, the only natural light they received
being that which came from peep holes high up on the walls. The children went
hungry day after day; the younger ones cried for their parents, but the
heartless and prejudiced generation shut its ears and the inmates suffered.

During a periodic inspection of the institution made by officials of the state,
the real reaons for the Pergrin family being in the poor house were brought to
lifht. William made it clear to those officials that all his family wished to
do was work and be allowed the same opportunities that others had. So, once
again to the coal mines they went, even down to and including little Ben.

The family finally got reestablished and the initial persecution of the Saints
subsided, making life a little less of a struggle. Meanwhile, a little girl
named Elizabeth had been born on 13 January 1847 at Llangyfelach.[^10]

The following year, on 30 December 1848 William baptized his son Joseph Mathew
Perkins, who was confirmed on 4 January 1849 by Joseph Mathews, Elder of the
Treboeth Branch.[^11]

Ruth Perkins, 10th child of William and Jane, was born 7 May 1849 at
Llangyfelach and was blessed later that year, on 1 November, by Elder Thomas
Pugh. Hyrum, the 11th child, was born 18 February 1851 at Birch Grove, a small
grouping of houses belonging to the jurisdiction of the hamlet of Llamsamlet.
Hyrum was blessed on 10 March by Elder Joseph Mathews.[^12]

The 1851 Census was taken on the night of 30 March 1851. The enumerators were
to obtain the name, marital status, actual age, occupation and birthplace of
each person in every household, and to state the relationship of each person to
the head of the house. Thus, we find our Perkins family in the following entry.

The area in which they were living is described in the census as "All that part
of the Hamlet of Llansamlet Higher which lies to the North of the old turnpike
road from Lon Las Bridge to the Star Public House and from thence East and
North of the Road by the Church to Glaesh Bridge to Letty Mean by Glanbrane to
Gelly deg and from thence back to Lon Las Bridge."

It should be noted that this entry certainly agrees with all of the foregoing
information included as from tradition. It should also be pointed out that even
though William's father's family had already changed their surname from Pergrin
to Perkins, William had not yet done so.

The family is give as follows:[^13]

    William Pergreen Head  md    age 45 Collier b.Swansea 
    Jane       "     wife  md        39           Llangyfelach 
    Thomas     "     son   unmd      17           " 
    John       "     son   unmd      16           St. John 
    Mary       "     dau             13           " 
    Joseph     "     son   unmd      11           " 
    Ann        "     dau              9           " 
    Benjamin   "     son              8           Llangyfelach 
    Elizabeth  "     dau              5           " 
    Ruth       "     dau              3           " 
    Hiram      "     son              1 mo.       Lansamlet

The remainder of the children were born at the home in Birch Grove in the
hamlet of Llansamlet as follows:[^14]

    Naomi born 31 July 1852 
    Martha born 26 Feb 1854 
    Daniel born 30 Apr 1857

Besides these 14 children, William and Jane also adopted Daniel Morgan who was
born 15 March 1866 at Capcoch in Llansamlet.[^15] Daniel was the son of Daniel
Morgan and Daniel Morgan and Ann Perkins.[^16]

During the year 1865 a cholera epidemic struck the area. Ruth, age 16, fell
sick and came very near dying. Her associates were dying all around her within
a few minutes after an attack of the dreaded disease. She, and the rest of the
family, escapted only through the power of faith and a special priesthood
blessing under the hands of David Rhees, one of the three noted preachers who
had become converted to Mormonism prior to that time.

On 21 June 1867, William and Jane along with many friends and relatives went to
the harbour to see some of their children off for America. Those that went were
Mary, Joseph, Ann, Ben, Ruth and Naomi. All these children made it to Utah
except Ann, who refused to join the Mormons. She remained in St. Louis,
Missouri were she married John Hughes Taylor. Norhing was heard of her until
about 30 years later when she learned of the family settling at Monticello, and
she and her husband, after all those years, came to pay a surprise visit to the
family who had all the time held the belief that she had been drowned in the
Johnson flood.[^17]

As soon as those who came first were able to save enough money, they sent it
back to Wales so that the rest of the family might be able to come. The Perkins
family together with others of the Saints were placed in a company under the
direction of Captain Elias Morris of Salt Lake City. "They left Liverpool on
the steamship Minnesota on the 2nd instant [^June], under the charge of Elder
Elias Morris, late president of the Welsh district."[^18] The company arrived
in Ogden, Utah on 23 June 1869 on the first passenger train to travel the new
Transcontinental Railroad, thus opening a new era in immigration to Utah.[^19]

The family moved to Salt Lake City where they remained until October. They
lived in the 16th Ward during this time. William and Jane were sealed in the
Endowment House on 4 October, 1869.[^20]

After attending the General Conference of the Church, the family began their
journey to southern Utah, or Deseret as this area was known at the time. They
accompanied Bishop Lunt and had a very enjoyable time, singing and serenading
each little town they stopped at along the way. The family consisted of Father
William, Mother Jane, Thomas, Elizabeth, Ben, Naomi, Hyrum, Martha, Daniel,
Daniel Morgan and Ben's wife Mary Ann Williams.[^21]

Life was short-lived for our Welsh forebearers. They had accompanied their
children on their epic journey rather than having led them. They settled in
Cedar City, built a home and attended to their duties, but never learned
English and did not become active in church or community affairs to the point
of leaving any history.

William was of a very retiring nature, but an energetic and industrious, though
frail man, as well as being faithful and humble. He died in Cedar City on 4
January 1876 having assured his exaltation and that of those of his children
who had obeyed his counsel. He was buried in the Cedar City cemetery to the
north of town. His tombstone inscription reads:

> William Perkins, born 16 February 1807 South Wales, son of Thomas Perkins;
> husband of Jane Mathews; died 4 January 1876.[^22]

Jane lived three years longer, but the death of her husband had been very hard
on her. She was an extremely energetic, strong person. She has served the
purposes of her creation well, having raised a large and obedient family and
had seen them reach their mature years and off on their own. She died 18 March
1879 in Cedar City and was laid to rest beside her husband. Her tombstone
inscription reads:

> Jane Mathews born 27 May 1814 Llangefelich, \[sic\] South Wales, daughter of
> Thomas Mathews and Mary Davis; wife of William Perkins; died 15 March
> 1879.[^23]

## FOOTNOTES

[^1]: The birth date of William Perkins is different in some of the sources
      checked from one that has been used in this history:
      a) Self Endowment TIB Card (Endowment House No. 14134, Book F, Living,
         p. 33) -- 6 Feb 1807
      b) _My Ancestor's History_ by Evan Williams, gives 16 Feb 1807 \[manuscript\]
      c) Cedar City, Utah LDS Ward Records (GS Ser. No. 025,845, 1875-1883) -- 16 Feb 1807
      d) Treboeth, Wales LDS Branch Records (GS Ser.No. 104,172, p. 1) -- 16 Feb 1813
      e) Tombstone inscription -- 16 Feb 1807.

[^2]: Muriel Shupe, _Ann Mathews, Handcart Pioneer_ \[manuscript\] p. 1.

[^3]: The birth date of Jane Mathews is different in some of the sources
      checked from the one that has been used in this history:
      a) Treboeth, Wales LDS Branch Records (GS Ser.No. 104,172, p. 1) Record
         of Members 1844-1880, p. 1, No. 4 -- 28 May 1814
      b) Self Endowment TIB Card (Endowment House No. 3488, Book G, Living,
         p. 115) -- 28 May 1815
      c) Cedar City, Utah LDS Ward Records (GS Ser. No. 025,845) Early -- 1907,
         No. 1147 -- 27 May 1814

[^4]: Correspondence to Gladys P. Lyman 17 Sep 1959 from the Genealogical Society

[^5]: _Ibid._; family records brought from Wales by William Perkins

[^6]: David E. Gardner & Frank Smith, Genealogical Research in England and Wales, pp. 85-86.

[^7]: 1841 National Census of Great Britain (GS Ser. No. 464,332) p. 5 of St.
      John's Parish under the description given in the history.

[^8]: Family records

[^9]: Treboeth LDS Branch Records, op. cit., pp. 3-4

[^10]: Family records

[^11]: Treboeth LDS Branch Records, op. cit., p. 5, No. 60.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 17, Nos. 2 & 3.

[^13]: 1851 National Census of Great Britain (GS Ser. No. 104,212) p. 23 House
       No. 73 in Birch Grove, Llansamlet Higher, Hamlet in Llansamlet Parish.

[^14]: Family records

[^15]: Self Endowment TIB Card (St George, No. 2636, Book C, pp. 402-403).

[^16]: Cedar City, Utah LDS Ward Records (GS Ser. No. 025,845), No. 1155.

[^17]: Bessie M. Sherwood, _Life Sketch of Mary Jane Wilson_ \[manuscript\],
       Monticello, Utah, p. 3.

[^18]: _Deseret News_, Wednesday, June 30, 1869.

[^19]: Ruth Perkins Bailey, _Ruth Perkins Bailey_ \[manuscript\], 1956 p. 1.

[^20]: TIB Cards of William Perkins and Jane Mathews.

[^21]: Cedar City, Utah LDS Ward Records.

[^22]: Bernella E.S. Gardner, compiler, _Cedar City Cemetery Record_
       \[manuscript\], Cedar City, Utah, 1937, p. 47.

[^23]: _Ibid_.,  p. 46; Cedar City, Utah LDS Ward Records (GS Ser. No. 025,845)
       Early -- 1907, No. 1147.

* * *

* 24 Oct 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
