# HISTORY OF JOHN EVAN PRICE, JR.

### (1855­- 1908)

### by Edith Evans

\[Portrait\]

John Evan Price, Jr., son of John Evan and Ruth Williams Price, was born at
Llanfeigan, Brecknock, South Wales, January 18, 1855, at 4:00 p.m. On January
18, 1863, he was baptized a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints.

During his early life, he moved from place to place with his parents as his
father spent most of his time doing missionary work.  There was little
opportunity for schooling. Even small children were carried into the mines to
pick up coal and be errand boys. Sometimes they never saw the sun for weeks. He
had this experience.

With his parents, he immigrated to America in May of 1865. They sailed from
Liverpool, England on the Bridgewater ship. They were five weeks and two days
on the water before landing at New York. They went from there to Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, where many Welsh immigrants were living. The Welsh people treated
them very kindly, but they desired to go west to make their home. They left
Pittsburgh and went to Detroit. From there they left July 18, 1866, with
Captain John D. Holladay’s ox team company and headed west.  They encountered
many hardships on the plains. John, then 11 years of age, walked most of the
way, as did many of the children and adults who were able. It eased the load
for the oxen so they might bring their few possessions.

They reached Salt Lake City on September 25, 1866, and stayed there a few days.
They then went to Brigham City where both parents were stricken with mountain
fever and were confined to bed for two months. In February 1867, the family
moved to Malad and joined their daughter, Ruth, who had come to this country
previously and was married to Fredrick Thomas. They lived in Malad until April
1868. They then moved to what is known as Samaria, where his father had taken
up 160 acres of land on which he had built a dugout.  They were the first white
family to settle there.

These pioneer children worked long and hard. Young John helped clear the
sagebrush from the land ready for planting and went to the canyon with his
father and brother, Daniel, to get logs for their homes, and other buildings.
His father was an ambitious, hard-working man and always tried to use the logs
the day we brought them from the canyon. They built a sawpit and sawed the logs
at night and put them in place. They sometimes averaged as many as 18 trips to
the canyon in three weeks. Their home was built a few logs at a time. They also
sawed logs for sheds, corrals and fence posts. He helped dig canals for
irrigation with pick and shovel. The logs used for the first church house were
hewed by hand. He participated in this project.

When older, he freighted to Belleview, Wood River, Challis, Salmon and Eagle
Rock, which is now Idaho Falls, and from Corinne to Montana. The first
freighting was done with oxen. Later, horses were used. At one time they camped
for the night at what is now known as Mud Lake. They unharnessed the horses for
the night and the mosquitoes swarmed on them so thick they could hardly tell
one horse from another.

He married Emma Morse, daughter of William and Margaret Evans Morse, on March
15, 1883, in the Endowment House at Salt Lake City. They traveled to Brigham
City by team and covered wagon, taking a load of wheat with them to sell.  With
the money, they bought a wedding ring, some knives, forks, utensils, dishes and
groceries. Leaving the horses in a rented pasture and their supplies with
friends, they boarded a train and went to Salt Lake City where they were
married.

Father had a two-room brick house built before they were
married. The inside of the house was white washed with lime
and was later plastered. The floor was of rough lumber. More
rooms were added later and they lived the remainder of their
lives in this home.

\[Portrait of Emma Morse\]

There was no water on the place and water had to be hauled in water barrels
from the Samaria spring. The old water barrel on the water sleigh, pulled by a
horse, was a familiar sight in this pioneer village. He homesteads a ranch at
Pleasant View just three miles from their home. On the ranch they built one
large building, which was divided, and a grain bin was built in part of it.
Using straw ticks, they made their beds on top of the grain. They lived on the
ranch only long enough to prove up the land.

John E. Price, Jr. was ordained a High Priest in the L.D.S. Church. He attended
his meetings regularly although he was not a public man. He did much charity
work and always paid every obligation to his church. At one time he hauled
lumber for several weeks to help build the Logan Temple. He did not fulfill a
mission for his Church, but he and his small sons ran the ranches and cared for
the animals of his brother and brother-in-law while they fulfilled missions. He
was a firm believer in family prayer and tried to teach his children by
example.  He served his community as school trustee, water master, constable
and member of the water board. He farmed and raised stock as a means of
livelihood.

He was a loving and kind husband and father, a man that took great delight in
his children. He also took pride in his animals, always keeping them well fed
and cared for.  Father was 5 feet 9 inches tall, broad shouldered, slim bodied.
He had gray eyes, dark brown hair parted on the side and a sandy mustache. He
was a quiet and reserved man and seemed to be free in conversation only with
those he was well acquainted with.

\[Photo\]

    Left to Right: Ruth Price Sorenson, Royal Jr., Lettia Sorenson (Royal Sorenson’s sister)
    Margaret Price, Edith Price, Emma Price

On March 13, 1908, he passed away at his home in Samaria of pneumonia and was
buried March 16, the day they had planned to celebrate their silver wedding
anniversary. He left his wife and the following sons and daughters: William M.,
John M., Evan M. Ruth, Elmer V., Daniel M, Margaret, Esther, Edith and Emma.

\[Photo of John Evan Price, Jr. & Emma Morse\]

***********

    John Evan Price, Jr.
      Born:    18 Jan 1855
      Married: Emma Morse, 15 Mar 1886
               She was born 17 June 1865

    Their second child was John Morse Price
    Born:    1 Nov. 1886
    Married: Ruth Williams, 9 Feb 1907
             She was born 27 Mar 1889

* * *

* From a CD from Jean Capener.
* 20 Oct 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
