# HISTORY OF RUTH WILLIAMS

### (1816 - 1873)

### By Edith Evans

Ruth Williams, my grandmother, was born April 14, 1816 at Breconshire, South
Wales.  She was the daughter of Daniel and Ruth Jones Williams. Her brothers
and sisters were Rodrick, Williams, Reese, Daniel, Mary, John and Samuel.
Grandmother was 5' 3" tall with brown hair, which she parted in the middle and
combed straight down on both sides and pinned in a bob at the nape of her neck.
She was heavy set. She was very patient and had a kind and loving disposition.

She married John Evan Price in May 1841. They started life together at Aberygyr
where they lived until 1845. They then moved to Llanelly Mertyban Parish where
Isaac was born on May 7, 1845 and died in 1846. Another son, David, was born to
them on March 4, 1847.  He died the same year. A daughter, Ruth, was born on
April 16, 1848.  On May 1, 1850, another daughter, Mary, was born. Grandmother
was alone at the time. The only food they had was dry bread and barely enough
water for her and her two small girls. A few days later she did her washing and
caught cold. She was confined to bed for many months.

\[Photo of John Evan Price\]

They were the only Latter-day Saints in that community and none of the people
would go near them. The persecution was very bitter. My grandfather cared for
her and took care of the baby. She was a firm believer in prayer. She and her
husband prayed continually for her recovery and acknowledged the hand of the
Lord in her life being spared. Another instance when her prayers were answered
was when she had no food in the house and prayed for help. She had a prompting
to go into the street. She laid her baby down and walked out into the street,
not knowing what to expect. She saw nothing and was turning to go back into the
house when a small whirl wind rose a few feet in front of her and when it
ceased, it had uncovered a pound sovereign. She was filled with joy and
thanksgiving.

Grandmother was blessed with the gift of tongues, both in speech and song. She
always wore the traditional Welsh hood and clothing. She did not believe in
having pictures taken. She likened them to the worship of idols and wanted no
pictures of people. One day while standing on a chair or stool to wind her
clock, she fell and broke several bones in her foot. Not having proper medical
care, she was left with a crippled foot and leg the remainder of her life.

Three other children blessed their home; Daniel Evan, who was born November 17,
1852; John Evan, on January 18, 1855 and Ann Maria, who was born June 14, 1859.
Grandmother was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and
was baptized 17 October 1847 by John Griffith. She had a desire to come to this
country and raise her children in a land where there was freedom of worship.

They left Liverpool, England May 1865 on the ship Bridge Water.  They were five
weeks and two days sailing from Liverpool to New York.  From New York they went
to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to join the Welsh immigrants. They stayed in
Pittsburgh months and went from there to Detroit to join the Mormon pioneers
and migrate west. They left Wyoming, Nebraska on July 18, 1866, and made the
long trek westward by ox team in Captain Holiday's company.

On September 25, 1866, they arrived in Salt Lake City and were treated very
kindly by the Saints. President Brigham Young shook hands and welcomed them
all. They stayed in Salt Lake City three days and started on their journey to
Malad to join their daughter, Ruth, who had married Fredrick Thomas. On the way
they were stricken with mountain fever and grandmother was confined to bed for
two months.

\[Photo of John Evan Price, Jr.\]

They came to Malad and stayed with Ruth until they were able to build a home of
their own. They sold their home for a wagon and a team of oxen and grandmother
moved to what is now known as Samaria, Idaho, where grandfather had taken 160
acres of land. Her first home was a dugout near a spring of water. She was the
only white woman there. In two months other pioneers went there to make their
homes and were truly welcomed by grandmother and her family. She was a very
hard worker. Although she was on crutches and had poor health, she carded wool,
spun yarn and knit clothing for her family. Through all the hardships she
suffered, and her poor health, she always maintained her patience, a jovial
disposition and outstanding courage.

She passed away September 20, 1873, and was buried the next day at Samaria,
Idaho. She contributed much to the valley in the posterity she left behind
through the following daughters and sons: Mrs. David (Esther) Edwards, Mrs.
John (Mary) Jones, Mrs.  Fredrick (Ruth) Thomas, Mrs. William (Ann Maria)
Rodrick, Daniel E. and John E. Price.

****************

Ruth Williams Price
  Born: 14 Apr 1816
  Married: John Evan Price, 22 May 1841
           He was born 3 Mar 1817

Their seventh child was
  John Evan Price, Jr.
    Born: 18 Jan 1855
    Married: Emma Morse, 15 Mar 1883
             She was born 17 June 1865

Their second child was John Morse Price
  Born: 1 Nov 1886
  Married: Ruth Williams, 9 Feb 1907
           She was born 27 Mar 1889

* * *

* From a CD from Jean Capener.
* 20 Oct 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
