# HISTORY OF ISRAEL HOYT

(This is a short history of Israel Hoyt, Born June 17, 1888 and married to
Charlotte May Stolworthy on September 10, 1912 in the St. George Temple. The is
the grandson of Israel Hoyt and Clarissa Amanda Miller who lived in Orderville
during the period of the United Order Days. Israel's father is Josiah Miller
Hoyt and his mother is Ellen Alice Spencer. Israel was only about sixteen when
his father died, leaving Ellen, called Nelly and his other wife Mary Ellen
Meeds, called Ellie to raise their children alone. Israel was the oldest living
son born in a family of eleven; four girls and seven boys, two of the sons died
as children. Israel was born in Orderville and had thirteen children of his
own. The following is take from his own handwriting recorded in 1959.)

The first I can remember of my father was in grandmother's old house just each
and north of the one she and Grandma Hannah lived in on the lot now used by
Heaton's Garage in Orderville, Utah. I don't know just how old I was, but it
was before I started school and that is where I remember a lot of my cousins as
children. I always remember Grandma Clarissa for the good salt rising bread she
used to make.

The first school I attended was at the feet of the clay hill just a few rods
north of Hans Chamberlain's barn, west of the big ditch where it came around to
Laun Cox's mill where he ground corn meal and whole wheat flour and had a big
grinding stone, sharpened axes, shovels and other tools all run by water.

My first school teacher was Aunt Moriah Porter. My first year was interrupted
by a spell of measles and rheumatism. Other teachers I had were Uncle Frank
Robertson, Sade Hopkins, Charles Whittaker, Karl Hopkins, Edwin Cutler and Ben
Cameron, who was teaching when I quit school to go to work before completing
the eighth grade.

Mother traded the home where we were living when father died to Charles Carroll
for one that was torn down where Ervin's home now is (1959). Then we bought the
old Frack Steven's home west of Orderville which was only partly finished. We
lathed and plastered the west part and all of the second story.

Mother boarded school teachers and Edith worked in the Orderville co-op. They
did the painting and papering after we boys did the lathing and plastering.
W.W. Adair did the plastering while we mixed the plaster and carried it to him.
That was a tall old house to carry a hod full of plaster up the rooms in the
second story.

Lottie and I lived with Mother the first winter after we were married on
September 10, 1910. We bought Susan Cox's home before Vern was born. (Vern was
the first son born to Israel and Lottie May in May 1913) It is the place H. Y
Reese lives in now in Orderville. Vern, Orson, Lamond and Dilworth were born
there.

I started to work for Franklin Heaton in May 1917 and we moved to Alton in
1918. We had several homes in Alton before we moved to St. George Utah for the
winter in 1930/1931. I worked for Mel and Kenneth Cox that winter and we moved
back to Alton.

Rollan, Willard, Tom and Aleena were born in Orderville all in different homes.
Lottie went there to be where she could be taken care of by Aunt Lettie Cox.
Errol, LeVee, Josiah and RahNell were born in Alton. Bruce was born in Kanab.

I have visited Temple Square and been in the tabernacle. I went through the
state capitol and have been in the Hotel Utah, the mission home and the welfare
house in Salt Lake City.

I have shaken hands with Joseph F. Smith, Heber J. Grant, George Albert Smith,
J. Ruben Clark, Apostles Albert E. Bowen, J. Spencer Kimble, Mathias F. Cowley,
Scouter Oscar A. Kirkham and a good many other that have visited the Kanab
Stake. Also Governor George Dern. I have heard Ruth May Fox speak and Lucy
Gates Bowern sing the Lord's Prayer.

(In 1943 Israel, Lottie and Bruce spent some time in new Mexico working for
Mell McGee on an Indian trading post. The year 1959 found the three of them in
Merced, California working with two other sons, Rollan and willard, in the food
produce business. But they soon returned to Alton, Utah and their home on the
bottom corner of Main Street. Here Israel spent his last days farming, growing
potatoes, corn and wheat on his lots in alton. He was always up early and did a
good days work before noon. He visited his children and other family members in
St. George and Orderville.)

* * *

* 25 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
