# PIONEER MIDWIVES

### DUP Lessons for May 1963
### by Louie Lamb Covington
### FROM ENGLAND

MATILDA JENKERSON STOLWORTHY was born August 13, 1827 in Alton, England, the
tenth child of Thomas and Christiana Lovock Jenkerson. She became the wife of
Thomas Stolworthy May 13, 1849, and in 1953 both joined the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-Day Saints. On the 27th of November 1854, they boarded the
ship Clara Wheeler for America disembarking at New Orleans. New Year's Day was
spent in this city after which they sailed up the Mississippi to St. Louis.
Another six months was spent here, Thomas working in the iron mills.  Joining
the Isaac Allred Company the long journey was completed to Utah in 1855.

Hardly had they become settled in their new home when Thomas was called to help
with the settlement of Cache Valley and here Matilda's first child, a girl
named Liza Cache Stolworthy was born. A year later the child passed away. From
Cache Valley a move was made to Parowan, Iron County where Thomas started a
bucket factory and foundry. After several months he brought his family back to
Salt Lake City, thence to Centerville and from there in 1868 to the Muddy
Mission.  When the settlers were released from this mission in December 1870,
the Stolworthy's moved to St. George where they lived with the Jarvis family.
In the spring of 1872, Mt. Carmel, Utah became their home, but because of
opposition there, the members who wanted to live the United Order moved a few
miles north and settled Orderville, Kane County. When the Order broke up in
1885, Huntington, Emery County became the home of the Stolworthy's for a few
years. Later they settled in Tropic, Garfield County.  When Thomas and Matilda
became too old to care for themselves, they sold their home and moved in with
their daughter Elizabeth Jolley in Tropic.  Later they visited their youngest
daughter, Mary Magdeline Black, in Richfield.  Returning to Orderville, they
spent their last days with their daughter, Roseannah Lamb.  Matilda was the
mother of eleven children.  She died at the age of ninety-one years, November
28, 1918.

Among her possessions was found a small wooden box and in it was a patriarchal
blessing given by William Black to Thomas and Matilda. There was also a license
issued June 5, 1893 to Matilda Stolworthy to practice obstetrics in Utah signed
by a Board of Medical Examiners. It was sealed and stamped No. 98. Dr. Fen
Heber Covington, a great-grandson of Matilda also a specialist in obstetrics
and gynecology, had her license framed and hung in his office in Twin Falls,
Idaho.

* * *

* 27 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
