# History of Hans Peter Larsen

### By Himself

I, Hans Peter Larsen, son of Lars Rasmussen and Christiana Peterson, was born
September 24, 1835 in Lillebrande, Falster, Denmark. My father was a miller by
trade. At the age of seven, I started school and remained there until I was
fourteen, then at the age of sixteen I went to sea as a cook on a Merchant
Vessel named "Thor" with Captain Neilson.

The trips were mostly between Denmark and England. They would take a cargo of
wheat over to Hull and the load a cargo of coal from New Castle. Our ship would
tie up in the winter and I would return home until spring.

During one of my visits home, a neighbour woman asked me if I had seen any
Mormons over in England. I had never heard of Mormons and did not know whether
they were animals or humans. She told me about some Elders who had come into
the district and were holding private meetings. This got my mother quite
interested. There was just one family of Mormons in our town by the name of
Rasmus Mickleson. One day, the wife of Mr. Mickleson came to our house to
visit. I decided to have some fun with her so I started to tease her about
Mormonism, but she knew more about the scriptures than I did so I had to give
up. When she left she told us she would let us know when the Elders visited
her, and we could come and have a chat with them. So mother and I went down one
evening.

The president of the Conference was there, a man named John Swenson. He
explained the principles of Mormonism in a very clear and pleasant way. I sat
there and could not help but admire him, and everything he said seemed
reasonable to me. I couldn't find any fault with him or his religion. It seemed
as though he carried a sweet influence with him whether in speaking, praying,
or singing.

The impression I received that evening never left me. I asked for some Mormon
literature and read it eagerly. From that time on, I was a constant visitor at
Mr. Mickelson's home. He was ordained a Priest, and he would explain the gospel
to me.

I knew Mormonism was true, but my people were so against it I didn't know what
to do. I decided to ask President Swenson to help me out of my difficulty. He
told me to be humble and prayerful and the Lord would show me whether Mormonism
was true or not. But for some time, I could not bring myself before the Lord in
prayer. Finally I decided to leave Mormonism alone as I did not feel that I
could leave my country.

But still the feeling hung with me that Mormonism was right. I couldn't get rid
of it. Once when talking with Elder Swenson he sort of ridiculed me for being
in such a state of mind so I decided to humble myself and do as he told me.

Accordingly, one evening I went into the orchard to pray. An unseen power
seemed to take possession of me and stopped my tongue. I did not know what to
do to free myself. I was in an awful state of mind, but I continued to struggle
to pray and in a short time the evil influence began to leave me and a peaceful
calm feeling came over me. I never felt so happy in my life. I know it was the
Spirit of the Lord, and I then knew what my duty was. I then went into the
house and to bed. I slept peacefully all night. The fear of leaving home and
country left me, and I was ready for baptism.

I was baptised by Rasmus Micklesen on November 9, 1852, at the age of
seventeen. When my mother heard about it, she was nearly heartbroken. The man
for whom I was working was also very bitter against us so I decided to leave
town. I went to a neighbouring town and obtained work with a farmer who was a
Mormon. They were very kind to me. I had been there just a little while when
they began making preparations to come to Utah. As he was seventy years old, he
felt he was too old to make the journey alone so he told me to come along and
help them and he would pay my way.

In the fall of 1854, we left home and went to Copenhagen where the Norwegion
and Swedish saints were to gather before starting. We took passage on the
steamer "Simplids" under Captain Hansen. We made our first stop at a little
place and waited several days for the Yeallanders. We then started once more. A
terrible storm arose forcing us back to a landing on the coast of Norway. We
stayed there eleven days. The people were very kind to us. Soon we took our
leave and crossing the North Sea, landed at Hull, England. From there, we went
to Liverpool by rail. Arriving there, we were taken to an emigrant hotel, where
we stayed a week waiting for a vessel to cross the Atlantic.

We left Liverpool on the ship "James Nesmith," taking six weeks for the trip
across the Atlantic. The first mate on the ship hated the Mormons, and made it
very unpleasant for us. He tried to stop our holding meetings, but we appealed
to the Captain and he gave us permission to hold our meetings every Sunday. The
mate, to get even with us, served us very poor food and little of it.

After crossing the Atlantic, we came up the Gulf of Mexico to the mouth of the
Mississippi River; from there to New Orleans, then to St. Louis, where we were
met by Erastus Snow. We gathered our necessary supplies, changed steamers, and
started for Atchison, Kansas. It was in the month of March and the weather was
very cold. We suffered terribly until we made shelter for ourselves. Cholera
broke out in camp and many of the saints died. We stayed at Atchison, Kansas
for ten weeks. All the men the could work were there getting the ground ready
for a warehouse.

A man by the name of Milo Andrus went to buy cattle and wagons for us; and as
soon as he arrived with them, we started across the plains. We were not
familiar with driving cattle and we had a terrible time for a few days. It took
four men to a yoke of cattle (the cattle did not understand the Danish
language).

We arrived in Salt Lake on the ninth of September, 1855, having been nearly a
year on the road. Brother Skrader wanted me to go with him to San Pete County,
but I wanted to stay in Salt Lake and earn a wagon and yoke of cattle. I hired
out to a man named Gordon and worked for him two years, but it proved all for
nothing as he cheated me out of my entire wages. During this time, I became
very homesick and discouraged as I couldn't as yet speak much English.

James Hill and Issac Sorensen were going to Cache Valley, and they gave me a
wagon and yoke of oxen and took me with them. I appreciated this very much, and
we settled together in Mendon in 1859. We were close friends all our lives.

I was in Echo Canyon during the war and was in the company that received
Governor Cummings when he entered this territory. Before Johnson's army came to
this territory, President Young ordered all the people north of Salt Lake to
make their home in Cedar Valley. The family I was living with went to Spanish
Fork until all was settled. Then I went to live with Alexander Hill who was
very kind to me. I was treated as one of the family. Then I came to Cache
Valley with the above mentioned brothern.

In 1862, President Young called a company from Cache Valley to go to Omaha and
bring back the emigrants waiting to come to Utah. I was one of them. We didn't
have enough wagons to make a company of our own so we joined a company in Ogden
making thirty wagons. Our captain was a man named Henry Miller from Farmington,
Utah. He organised our company into groups of ten wagons. I was in the first
ten. Each of these groups had their own captain. I was chosen captain of the
first one. Our rations were very meager on the road, consisting mainly of flap
jacks fried in bacon grease and coffee made from peas. We had neither groceries
or fruit. Mendon people furnished nearly all the supplies. To lighten our load
going to Ogden, we left flour at different places and picked it up when we
returned. We arrived at a landing of the Missouri River, having to stay there
several days until the emigrants arrived. When they came there were so many
more than we expected that we had to overload our wagons with their luggage and
all who were able had to walk most of the way. This was very hard for them as
they were used to working in offices and no walking.

Our Captain gave us orders to walk all the way and be very kind to the cattle
as they had to work when they returned to the valley. We journeyed along the
Platte River for a way, then entered Wyoming.

While there one night, I could see that Captain Miller was worried. Soon he
came to me and said, "Captain Larsen, I would like you to go through all the
wagons and see that the load of each is divided evenly." Some of our oxen were
getting very poor. He also said to me, "I want you to look after the sick and I
charge you not to let any people leave camp to walk ahead of the train wagons
as is their custom because we are in Indian territory and the Indians may kill
them. My reply to Captain Miller was this, "I have walked every step of the way
thus far, took my turn standing guard, taking care of the sick, but I will do
my best." And I did. I walked all the way to Salt Lake City, arriving there as
near as I can remember in the month of September, 1862. We didn't lose one oxen
on all our journey due to the wise management of our Captain, Henry Miller.

When Mendon was first settled, a fort was built and all lived there together as
a protection against the Indians. For a time, they lived the United Order. The
settlers engaged in farming and cattle raising. Cache Valley was very beautiful
and had some of the best farm land to be found anywhere in the world. The
cattle could graze knee deep in the grass.

I was married to Eleanor Shelton in the old Endowment House in Salt Lake City,
by Daniel H. Wells on December 6, 1875. We have had twelve children, eight of
whom are still living. We have also raised two others. We have 31 grandchildren
and five great grand-children. I have always been active in Church and Civil
affairs, and a constant worker on my farm for years. I am now, in February,
1928, residing at Mendon, Utah, and am in fairly good health.

* * * * * * * * * *

## Additional Notes

### by Elizabeth Larsen Pehrson

One day a group of men went into the Canyon to get logs to begin the
construction of a meeting house. Shortly after they had gone to work it was
discovered that they had forgotten to take a lunch with them. Hans Peter Larsen
was sent to take something to them. While he was on his way, a blinding snow
storm came up. The trail was soon covered and he was hopelessly lost. He
wandered around for what seemed hours, and finally he became so cold and
exhausted that he was about to give up. He prayed earnestly for help. Suddenly,
the snow parted and looked like a long tunnel with a little cabin at the end of
it. He was able to make his way to it and was taken in, warmed, fed, and put to
bed for two days while his frozen feet thawed out. The cabin was located just
above town, but he had lost the sense of direction and didn't know where he
was.

While many men were living in pologamy, he had remained unmarried and was
batching it with Hans Jensen. Brother Jensen was later excommunicated from the
Church, but they always remained good friends.

On December 6, 1875, he married Eleanor Shelton in the Endowment House at Salt
Lake City, Utah. He was forty years of age, and she was not quite seventeen.
Her parents had joined the church in England. They were on their way to America
when Eleanor was born. This event took place in Philadelphia. They remained
there about a year before continuing their journey. Her father, Richard John
Shelton, was a blacksmith. Her mother, Mary Wann Shelton, was a beautiful woman
with a lovely singing voice, and a marked talent for nursing. On several
occasions, she set broken bones with very successful results.

Hans and Eleanor began their married life in a two-roomed log cabin. Later-on,
they built a larger and better frame house in which they lived the remainder of
their lives.

Their first child died in infancy and Eleanor took a baby whose Mother had just
died, and nursed it as her own. She raised him until he was eight years old.
His name was John George. At this time, his father married again, and took John
to his home. Eleanor grieved very much over this, but he came to see her quite
often and always caller her Mother. When he grew up, he went East to study
Civil Engineering and became very successful. Every Christmas as long as she
lived, he sent her a substantial gift of money.

They were almost self supporting as they raised their own flour, meat, butter,
eggs, milk, honey, fruit, and vegetables. Conditions were changing rapidly, and
both he and his wife did their full share in building up churches, schools, and
roads. He was President of the High Priest's Quorum for many years. While
helping to build the meeting house, he fell from the roof and seriously injured
his back. He also suffered severe attacks of gull stones until under the
administration of Bishop Henry Hughes, he became healed.

One day, he descended a well for the purpose of clearing out some dead leaves.
He got into some quick sand and began to sink. His wife and daughter, Lucy,
threw him a rope, and with great difficulty pulled him to safety.

One year at a twenty-fourth of July celebration, they had four of their
children poisoned. The refreshment committee made a large quantity of ice cream
which they sold during the afternoon. In some way, it became contaminated and
contained ptomaine poison. There were only two families in town who did not
have some one sick that night. One of our neighbours had invited friends to
help the celebrate, and they, too, had partaken of it. It was a warm night, and
ten of them took blankets and laid on the lawn. All the doctors and nurses from
the surrounding towns worked frantically all night. There were no fatalities,
but many were very near death for several hours.

When Hans' wife was fifty-eight, she was obliged to submit to a very serious
operation for hernia. Her main concern was how her husband was going to get
along alone. He was now eighty years old, and all of their children were
married. He knew how to cook very well, and his children and the neighbours
helped out. She lay in the William Budge Memorial Hospital for a month, but
made splendid recovery and enjoyed fairly good health after.

At the time of the big Centennial celebration at Logan, he was the oldest
pioneer in Cache Valley. He rode in a carriage as an honoured guest in the
parade.

His wife died May 11, 1928, and on September 22 of the same year, he followed
her. If he had lived two more days, he would have been ninety-three years old.

They were both buried at Mendon, Utah.

Four children had proceeded them in death. They were survived by eight
children, thirty-three grandchildren, and five great grandchildren.


* * *

* 22 Mar 2009 - Typed by Mark Esplin.
* 29 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
