# Brief History of Peter Larsen

## Written by his wife, Hannah Acomb Larsen.

Peter Larsen was born March 5, 1878, in Mendon, Utah. He was the son of Hans
Peter and Eleanor Shelton Larsen. His father was one of the first settlers in
Mendon—a real pioneer. His mother was born in Philadelphia, as her parents were
on the way to Utah to join the saints there. She was a fine, noble woman.

Peter was the oldest of nine living children. Three had passed on in infancy.
As they were not rich enough to hire help, he had to go to work on the farm
quite young and really helped to raise the younger family.

His schooling was very meager. He was taken out for spring work and kept out
until the fall work was done. So a winter quarter every year was the most of
what he spent in school. He was very studious as a boy and as a young man. He
was a great reader and thus became a self-educated man. He was very active in
church work from the time he was a deacon. I think he was a counselor in all
the Aaronic Priesthood Quorums. As a young man he was a teacher in Sunday
School for a number of years. He also was a counselor in M.I.A. For a great
many years he was Secretary and Treasurer for the Y.M.M.I.A. In the days of
Religion Class, he was the supervisor for a number of years. He also was
assistant to Superintendent W. I. Sorensen in the Sunday School—a position he
held until he was appointed second counselor to Bishop M. D. Bird in the Mendon
Ward. He held that position for four years until he moved to Nevada with his
family.

After his return home, he was associated with Brother Charles Ladle and Brother
Phin Bird on the Old Folks Committee. These three were drawn very close to each
other during those years. After Brother Ladle resigned, Peter was chairman of
the same committee for a few more years. He was also active on the missionary
committee.

In civil affairs he served three terms as city councilman and two terms as
mayor of Mendon city. His advice was sought on many occasions, but no one would
know it by his actions as he was very humble and very unassuming. He often
wondered if he were worthy of the trust that was placed in him.

He married Hanna Acomb on June 29, 1904, in the Logan Temple. Thirty-seven
happy years were spent together. Two children, one an adopted daughter and one
son of their own, made their home complete. He left seven grandchildren whom he
thought were wonderful. He had a great love for little children.

I think one of the happiest times of his life was when his son filled a good,
honorable mission. That meant more to him than any worldly honor.

Peter Larsen died February 28, 1941. He died with full faith in the gospel of
this church. He was a High Priest at the time of his death and still a ward
teacher, a position he held all his life.

### Added thoughts for the history of Peter Larsen Jr. by Maggie Larsen Bergener:

Peter was given a very wonderful patriarchal blessing. In it he was told he
would be called to help build up Jackson County, Missouri at the second coming
of Christ. As he has been dead many years, he would come as a resurrected
being.

I don't remember by father ever taking my mother to an "Old Folks Party"
because of his age, but I went with mother one time. She was watching all the
others dance. Suddenly, her wonderful, large son, Pete, came and took her out
on the floor to dance a quadrille! She was so very proud and happy! I never saw
her dance again.

* * *

* 27 Apr 2008 - Typed by Mark P. Esplin.
* 29 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
