# My Father, Carl W. Pehrson

### by Phyllis Pehrson Harritt

I would like to pay tribute to my father for a number of reasons. It is
difficult to enumerate them because I think all children take so much for
granted. Until they have had the privilege of going through the same experience
of being a parent, they have no practical way of understanding the
unselfishness and compassion most parents demonstrate toward their children.

My father was so good to his wife and children. We were never in need of food
and the necessities of life. He worked hard--frequently twelve hours a day--six
days a week. He also planted a garden every year and we enjoyed the choice
vegetables and fruits.

He was also thoughtful and considerate of his widowed sister, Hilda. He visited
her regularly and would take her to town to get her groceries.

I remember my father telephoning my mother nearly every evening before he came
home from work to inquire if there was something he should get for her.

The Christmas before Calvin was born my father did the shopping. He went all
out and I thought we received the grandest gifts. As I remember--I got a
camera, and the twins received darling sweaters.

My father was so thrilled with the miracle of radio. I often wonder what he
would say about the marvels of television today.

I learned about the beauties of nature from a father who loved the canyons and
rivers where he could fish. How I loved to eat the fish that he caught! He
would feel our foreheads and say we could eat a little more because our
foreheads were still a little soft.

Dad always encouraged us in our musical endeavors. Money for lessons didn't
come easy during the depression. He never complained about driving Erma to the
numerous places she had been requested to play her violin.

During his last illness he was patient and appreciative of the care he
received. His last concern was for the welfare of his children.

We, his children--Phyllis, Ruth, Ruby, Erma, and Calvin--are proud to be heirs
to his name.

---Phyllis P. Harritt

August 1969


* * *

* 31 Jan 2005 - Typed as html by Mark Esplin.
* 30 Sep 2010 - Converted to [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown) by Daniel Esplin.
